Journal of Experimental Criminology (2019) 15:289–311 https://doi.org/10.1007/s11292-019-09372-3

Hot spots policing and crime reduction: an update of an ongoing systematic review and meta-analysis

Anthony A. Braga1 & Brandon S. Turchan2,3 & Andrew V. Papachristos4 & David M. Hureau5

Published online: 29 August 2019 # Springer Nature B.V. 2019

Abstract

Objectives This updated systematic review assesses the effects of focused police crime prevention interventions at crime hot spots. The review also examined whether focused police actions at specific locations result in crime displacement or diffusion of crime control benefits.

Methods Systematic review protocols and conventions of the Campbell Collaboration were followed to identify eligible hot spots policing studies, and meta-analytic techniques were used to assess the impact of hot spots policing on crime and investigate the influence of moderating variables.

Results The search strategies identified 65 studies containing 78 tests of hot spots policing interventions. Meta-analyses revealed a small statistically significant mean effect size favoring the effects of hot spots policing in reducing crime outcomes at treatment places relative to control places. Crime displacement and diffusion effects were measured in 40 tests. Meta-analyses favored a small statistically significant diffusion of crime control benefits over displacement.

Conclusion The extant evaluation research provides fairly robust evidence that hot spots policing is an effective crime prevention strategy. Focused police intervention at hot spot locations does not seem to result in the spatial displacement of crime into areas immediately surrounding targeted locations. Rather, crime control benefits seem to diffuse into proximate areas.

* Anthony A. Braga a.braga@northeastern.edu

- 1 School of Criminology and Criminal Justice, Northeastern University, 360 Huntington Avenue, Boston, MA 02115, USA
- 2 School of Criminology and Criminal Justice, Northeastern University, Boston, MA, USA
- 3 School of Criminal Justice, Rutgers University, Newark, NJ, USA
- 4 Department of Sociology, Northwestern University, Evanston, IL, USA
- 5 School of Criminal Justice, State University of New York, Albany, NY, USA


Keywords Police.Crimehotspots.Hotspotspolicing.Meta-analysis.Systematicreview. Policing experiment . Crime displacement . Crime prevention

Introduction

Over the past 30 years, crime scholars and practitioners have pointed to the potential benefits offocusing crime prevention efforts on crime places. A number of studies suggest that crime is not spread evenly across city landscapes. Rather, there is significant clustering of crime in small places, or “hot spots,” that generate half of all criminal events (Pierce et al. 1988; Shermanetal.1989a).Evenwithinthemostcrime-ridden neighborhoods,crimeclustersata few discrete locations and other areas are relatively crime free (Weisburd et al. 2012a). More recent research has reinforced this idea of crime concentrations (Braga et al. 2017) and led Weisburd (2015) to argue that there is a “law of crime concentration” at places showing not just that crime is concentrated but that it is concentrated at similar levels across cities and across time. A number of researchers have argued that many crime problems can be reduced more efficiently if police officers focused their attention on these persistent high-activity crime places (Sherman and Weisburd 1995; Weisburd 1997; Braga and Weisburd 2010). The appeal of focusing limited resources on a small number of high-activity crime places is straightforward. If police can prevent crime at these hot spots, then they might be able to control citywide crime levels (Weisburd et al. 2017a, b).

The available scientific evidence suggests that focused police interventions, such as directed patrols, proactive arrests, and problem-oriented policing, can produce significant crime prevention gains at crime hot spots (see, e.g., Skogan and Frydl 2004; Weisburd and Majimundar 2018). The practice of hot spots policing is supported by two key theoretical crime prevention mechanisms: deterrence and crime opportunity reduction (Nagin et al. 2015; Braga and Schnell 2018). Increasing police visibility in crime hot spots may generate substantial marginal deterrent effects by heightening potential offenders’ perceived risk of apprehension and discouraging them from taking advantage of concentrated crime opportunities in these small places (Durlauf and Nagin 2011). Police can also reduce crime by applying problem-oriented policing and situational crime prevention measures to modify opportunity structures that cause crime problems to recur in hot spots (Braga and Weisburd

- 2010). Critics of place-based interventions, however, charge that such policing strategies resultindisplacement—that is,criminalsmovetoplacesnotprotectedby policeintervention (e.g., Reppetto 1976). The available evidence suggests that hot spots policing interventions are more likely to be associated with the diffusion of crime control benefits into surrounding areas rather than crime displacement (Clarke and Weisburd 1994; Weisburd et al. 2006; Bowers et al. 2011).


Hot spots policing has become a very popular way for police departments to prevent crime. Many police departments report having the capability to manage and analyze crime data in sophisticated ways and, through management innovations such as Compstat, hold officers accountable for implementing problem-solving strategies to control hot spots locations (Weisburd et al. 2003). The 2007 Law Enforcement Management and Administrative Statistics (LEMAS) survey reported that nearly all police agencies in large metropolitan centers use computers for hot spots identification (Reaves 2010). The Police Executive Research Forum (2008) surveyed 176 US police departments and found that nearly 9 out of 10 agencies used hot spots policing strategies to deal with violent crime in

their jurisdictions and that problem-solving techniques were often deployed to address violent crime hot spots. In a more recent study of a representative sample of police agencies, the National Police Research Platform reported that 75% of the agencies surveyed used the hot spots policing approach (Mastrofski and Fridell n.d., reported in Weisburd and Majimundar 2018).

The widespread use of hot spots policing to prevent crime warrants ongoing careful reviews of the available empirical evidence on the crime control benefits of the approach. If hot spots policing program are effective in controlling crime, the societal benefits may be considerable. For instance, in an influential article, Durlauf and Nagin (2011) suggested that crime and incarceration in the USA would both be reduced if resources were shifted from imprisonment to policing. Among other focused police interventions, they specifically point to evaluations of hot spots policing deployment strategies as evidence that the police, when properly oriented, can prevent crime. As new program evaluations are completed, however, conclusions on the crime control efficacy of hot spots policing could change in response to the growing scientific evidence base. For instance, recent hot spots policing studies have reported null effects (Gerell 2016), crime increases (Phillips et al. 2016), and modest crime displacement (Blattman et al. 2017). This short report provides updated findings from an ongoing Campbell Collaboration systematic review of the effects of hot spots policing on crime (Braga 2001, 2005, 2007; Braga et al. 2012, 2014).

Methods

The protocols and conventions of the Campbell Collaboration were followed in this systematic review and meta-analysis of the scientific evidence on the effects of hot spots policing on crime.1 Meta-analysis is an analytic method designed to synthesize empirical relationships across studies, such as the effects of a specific crime prevention intervention on criminal offending behavior (Wilson 2001). Meta-analysis uses specialized statistical methods to analyze the relationships between findings and study features (Lipsey and Wilson 2001; Wilson 2001). The “effect size statistic” is the index used to represent the findings of each study in the overall meta-analysis of study findings and represents the strength and direction (positive or negative) of the relationship observed in a particular study (e.g., the size of the treatment effect found). The “mean effect size” represents the average effect of treatment on the outcome of interest across all eligible studies in a particular area and is estimated by calculatingameanthatisweighted bytheprecisionoftheeffectsizeforeachindividualstudy.

Eligibility criteria of studies in the review

To be eligible for this review, interventions used to control crime hot spots were limited to police-led crime control efforts. Suitable police crime control efforts included traditional tactics such as directed patrol and heightened levels of traffic enforcement (Sherman and Weisburd 1995; Ratcliffe et al. 2011), applications of technology such as actively monitored closed circuit televisions (CCTV, see Piza et al. 2015) and license plate readers (Lum et al.

- 2011a) to enhance police presence in high-crime places, and alternative strategies such as


- 1 Additional details on the methods of this updated systematic review are included in the full report to the Campbell Collaboration (Braga et al. 2019).


problem-oriented policing (Braga and Bond 2008; Groff et al. 2015). The units of analysis considered in this review were crime hot spots or high-activity crime “places.” These small units included specific locations such as stores and apartment buildings as well as clusters of addresses, street blocks, street segments and street intersections (Eck 1997; Weisburd et al. 2016). However, this review does include evaluation designs that compare changes at larger arealunits, suchas police beats orcensus tracts,ifthe implemented hotspotspolicing program was clearly focused at specific places within the larger areal unit. For instance, the well-known Kansas City Gun Project quasi-experiment evaluated the effects of increased gun seizures focusedatgunhotspotswithinan8by10blockpolicebeatonguncrimerelativetotraditional policing services in comparison police beats (Sherman and Rogan 1995a).

In eligible studies, crime places that received the hot spots policing intervention were compared to places that experienced routine levels of traditional police service (i.e. regular levels of patrol, ad hoc investigations, etc.). The comparison group study had to be either experimental or quasi-experimental (nonrandomized) (Shadish et al. 2002). Eligible studies had to measure the effects of police intervention on officially recorded levels of crime at places such as incident reports, citizen emergency calls for service, and arrest data. The review also examined crime displacement and diffusion of crime control benefits reported by the studies (Clarke and Weisburd 1994; Reppetto 1976).

Search strategies for identifying eligible studies

Several strategies were used to perform an exhaustive search for literature fitting the eligibility criteria. First, a keyword search2 was performed on 15 abstract databases.3 Second,thebibliographiesofpastnarrativeandempiricalreviewsofliteraturethatexamined the effectiveness of police crime control programs were reviewed (e.g., Braga 2016; Higginson and Mazerolle 2014; Johnson et al. 2014; Lum et al. 2011b; Telep et al. 2014a; Telep and Weisburd 2012; Weisburd and Telep 2014; Weisburd et al. 2015a, b). Third, forward searches for works that cited seminal hot spots policing studies were performed (Braga et al. 1999; Braga and Bond 2008; Sherman et al. 1989b; Sherman and Rogan 1995a; Sherman and Weisburd 1995; Weisburd and Green 1995; Weisburd et al. 2006). Fourth, bibliographies of past completed Campbell systematic reviews of police crime prevention efforts were searched (Bowers et al. 2011; Braga 2001, 2005, 2007; Braga et al. 2012, 2014; Braga and Weisburd 2012; Braga et al. 2015; Koper and Mayo-Wilson 2012; Mazerolle et al. 2013). Fifth, hand searches of leading journals in the field were performed.4

- 2 The terms were: “hot spots AND police”, “crime place AND police”, “crime clusters AND police”, “crime displacement”, “place-oriented interventions”, “high crime areas AND police”, “high crime locations AND police”, “targeted policing”, “directed patrol”, “crackdowns”, and “enforcement swamping.”
- 3 These databases were: Criminal Justice Abstracts, Sociological Abstracts, NCJRS Abstracts, Educational Resources Information Clearinghouse, Google Scholar, Proquest Dissertation and Theses A&I, Westlaw Next, Government Publications Office – Monthly Catalog, Informit, Web of Science Core Collection, Academic Search Premier, C2-SPECTR (original review only), HeinOnline, Social Sciences Premium Collection, and Rutgers University’s Gray Literature Database.
- 4 These journals were: Criminology, Criminology & Public Policy, Justice Quarterly, Journal of Research in Crime and Delinquency, Journal of Criminal Justice, Police Quarterly, Policing, Police Practice and Research, British Journal of Criminology, Journal of Quantitative Criminology, Crime & Delinquency, Journal of Criminal Law and Criminology, and Policing & Society. Hand searches covered January 1979 to February 2017.


The searches were all completed between January 2017 and February 2017. Thus, the review only covers studies completed in 2017 and earlier. Sixth, after finishing the above searchesandreviewingthestudiesasdescribedlater,thelistofstudiesmeetingoureligibility criteria was emailed to leading criminology and criminal justice scholars knowledgeable in the area of hot spots policing strategies. These 146 experts were defined as those who authored at least one study eligible for this review, anyone involved with the National Academy of Sciences review of police research, and other leading policing scholars (list available in Appendix D of our full report to the Campbell Collaboration). This helped to identify studies the above searches left out as these experts were able to make referrals to studies that were missed, particularly unpublished studies. Finally, an information specialist was engaged at the outset of our review and at points along the way in order to ensure that appropriate search strategies were used to identify the studies meeting the criteria of this review.5

Statistical procedures and conventions

Asmentionedearlier,meta-analyseswereusedtodeterminethesize,direction,andstatistical significance of the overall impact of hot spots policing strategies on crime by weighting program effect sizes based on the variance of the effect size and the study sample size (Lipsey and Wilson 2001). We used the standardized mean difference effect size (also known as Cohen’s d; see Cohen 1988) and employed the Effect Size Calculator, developed by David B. Wilson and available on the Campbell Collaboration’s website, to calculate standardized mean difference effect sizes for reported outcomes in each study. We then used Biostat’s Comprehensive Meta Analysis Version 2.2 to conduct the meta-analysis of effect sizes.

One problem in conducting meta-analyses in crime and justice is that investigators often do not prioritize outcomes examined. This is common in studies in the social sciences in which authors view good practice as demanding that all relevant outcomes be reported. However, the lack of prioritization of outcomes in a study raises the question of how to derive an overall effect of treatment. As such, we analyzed the studies using three approaches. The first combines all reported outcomes reported into an overall average effect size statistic. The second represents the largest effect reported in the studies and gives an upperboundtoourfindings. Itisimportantto notethatinsomeofthestudieswithmorethan oneoutcomereported, thelargestoutcomereflected whatauthorsthoughtwouldbethe most direct program effect. Finally, we present the smallest effect size for each study. This approach is the most conservative and likely underestimates the effect of hot spots policing on crime. We use it here primarily to provide a lower bound to our findings.

Results

Selection and characteristics of eligible studies

Search strategies in the systematic review process generate a large number of citations and abstracts for potentially relevant studies that must be closely screened to determine whether

- 5 Ms. Phyllis Schultze of the Gottfredson Library at the Rutgers University School of Criminal Justice.


the studies meet the eligibility criteria (Farrington and Petrosino 2001). The screening process yields a much smaller pool of eligible studies for inclusion in the review. The search strategies produced 26,038 abstracts and the contents of these abstracts were reviewed for any suggestion of an experimental or quasi-experimental evaluation of hot spots policing interventions. A total of 274 distinct abstracts were selected for closer review, and the fulltext reports, journal articles, and books for these abstracts were acquired and carefully assessed to determine whether the studies met the eligibility criteria.

The original Campbell systematic review of the effects of hot spots policing on crime identified nine studies (Braga 2001, 2005, 2007) and first update of the review included 19 studies (Braga et al. 2012, 2014). In this iteration, we identified 65 eligible studies. Figure 1 presents the yearly counts of included hot spots policing evaluations and highlights the strong growth in hot spots policing studies since the completion of the previous review. The 46 newly identified studies represented a 242% increase in eligible studies since the prior review. The 65 eligible studies included

- (1) Minneapolis Repeat Call Address Policing (RECAP) Program (Sherman et al. 1989a)
- (2) New York Tactical Narcotics Teams (Sviridoff et al. 1992)
- (3) St.LouisProblem-OrientedPolicinginthreeDrugMarketLocationsStudy(Hope1994)
- (4) Minneapolis Hot Spots Patrol Program (Sherman and Weisburd 1995)
- (5) Jersey City Drug Markets Analysis Program (DMAP) (Weisburd and Green 1995)
- (6) Kansas City Gun Project (Sherman and Rogan 1995a)
- (7) Kansas City Crack House Police Raids Program (Sherman and Rogan 1995b)
- (8) Beenleigh Calls for Service Project (Criminal Justice Commission 1998)
- (9) Jersey City Problem-Oriented Policing at Violent Places Project (Braga et al. 1999)
- (10) Houston Targeted Beat Program (Caeti 1999)
- (11) Oakland Beat Health Program (Mazerolle et al. 2000)
- (12) Pittsburgh Police Raids at Nuisance Bars Program (Cohen et al. 2003)
- (13) Buenos Aires Police Presence after Terror Attack Study (DiTella and Schargrodsky 2004)
- (14) Philadelphia Drug Corners Crackdowns Program (Lawton et al. 2005)
- (15) Jersey City Displacement and Diffusion Study (Weisburd et al. 2016)
- (16) Lowell Policing Crime and Disorder Hot Spots Project (Braga and Bond 2008)
- (17) Jacksonville Policing Violent Crime Hot Spots Project (Taylor et al. 2011)
- (18) Philadelphia Foot Patrol Experiment (Ratcliffe et al. 2011)
- (19) Boston Safe Streets Teams Program (Braga et al. 2011)
- (20) DDACTS Program in Washoe County (Beck 2010)
- (21) Safer Cities Initiative in Los Angeles (Berk and MacDonald 2010)
- (22) License Plate Reader Patrols in Crime Hot Spots in two Adjacent Jurisdictions (Lum et al. 2011a)
- (23) Camden 28-Day Crime Suppression Initiative (Ratcliffe and Breen 2011)
- (24) Predictive Risk Mapping and Policing in Trafford, Greater Manchester (Fielding and Jones 2012)
- (25) Broken Windows Style Crackdowns in three California Cities (Weisburd et al. 2012b)
- (26) Operation LASER in Los Angeles (Uchida and Swatt 2013)
- (27) Palos Verdes Team Policing Project (Martinez 2013)
- (28) License Plate Readers at Crime Hot Spots Experiment in Mesa, Arizona (Koper et al. 2013)


- (29) Lowell Smart Policing Initiative (Bond et al. 2014)
- (30) DDACTS Program in Shawnee, Kansas (Bryant et al. 2014)
- (31) Summer Crime Initiative in Washington, DC (Mazeika 2014)
- (32) Operation Impact in Newark, New Jersey (Piza and O’Hara 2014)
- (33) St. Louis Metropolitan PD’s Firearms Violence Hot Spots Policing Experiment (Rosenfeld et al. 2014)
- (34) Hot Spots Randomized Field Trial in Sacramento, California (Telep et al. 2014b)
- (35) Trinidad & Tobago Police Services Hotspot Experiment (Sherman et al. 2014)
- (36) Policing Crime Hot Spots in Stockholm, Sweden (Marklund and Merenius 2014)
- (37) Policing Crime Hot Spots in Eskilstuna, Sweden (Marklund and Merenius 2014)
- (38) Anti-Drunk Driving Program in Rajasthan, India (Banerjee et al. 2014)
- (39) Philadelphia Policing Tactics Experiment (Groff et al. 2015)
- (40) Colorado Springs PD’s Risk-Based Intervention (Kennedy et al. 2015)
- (41) Newark PD’s Risk-Based Intervention (Kennedy et al. 2015)
- (42) Kansas City PD’s Risk-Based Intervention (Kennedy et al. 2015)
- (43) Glendale PD’s Risk-Based Intervention (Kennedy et al. 2015)
- (44) St. Louis County Hot Spots in Residential Areas Study (Kochel, Burruss, and Weisburd 2015)
- (45) Mobile Computing Technology at Crime Hot Spots in a Suburban County (Koper et al. 2015)
- (46) Proactive CCTV Monitoring with Directed Police Patrol in Newark, New Jersey (Piza et al. 2015)
- (47) Tactical Police Response at Micro-Time Hot Spots (Santos and Santos 2015a, b)
- (48) Philadelphia GunStat Model (Sorg 2015)
- (49) Dallas Patrol Management Experiment (Weisburd et al. 2015a)
- (50) West Midlands Police’s Randomized Control Trial of Policing Hot Spots (Williams 2015)
- (51) Actively Monitored CCTVs in Stockholm, Sweden (Marklund and Holmberg 2015)
- (52) Operation Style in Peterborough, England (Ariel et al. 2016)
- (53) Glendale Smart Policing Initiative (Dario 2016)
- (54) Policing Violent Crime Hot Spots in Malmö, Sweden (Gerell 2016)
- (55) Operation Impact in New York City (MacDonald et al. 2016)
- (56) Kansas City Foot Patrol Project (Novak et al. 2016)
- (57) Police Paramilitary Raids in Buffalo, New York (Phillips et al. 2016)
- (58) Offender-Focused Police Intervention at Hot Spots (Santos and Santos 2016)
- (59) New Haven Smart Policing Initiative (Sedelmaier and Hipple 2016)
- (60) Operation Menas in London, England (Ariel and Partridge 2016)
- (61) Investigating Hot Spots Policing in Copenhagen, Denmark (Attermann 2017)
- (62) Hot Spots Policing in Bogotá, Colombia (Blattman et al. 2017)
- (63) Philadelphia Predictive Policing Experiment (Ratcliffe et al. 2017)
- (64) Flint DDACTS Program (Rydberg et al. 2017)
- (65) Operation Strikeforce in Buffalo, New York (Wheeler and Phillips 2017)


Table 1 presents the basic characteristics of the 65 eligible hot spots policing studies. Fifty-one of the 65 (78.5%) identified studies were conducted in the USA. Four hot

||10|10|10|10|10|10|10|10| | | |
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
| | | | | | | | |9|9|9|
| | | | | | | | | | | |
|4<br><br>5|4<br><br>5|4<br><br>5|4<br><br>5|4<br><br>5|4<br><br>5|4<br><br>5| | |5|5|
| |2 2|2 2|2 2|2<br><br>3|2<br><br>3|2<br><br>3| | | | |
|0 0<br><br>1<br><br>0 0<br><br>1<br><br>0<br><br>1|0 0<br><br>1|1<br><br>0 0<br><br>1 1 1 1<br><br>0<br><br>1<br><br>0| | | | | | | | |
<br><br>13<br><br>0<br><br>2<br><br>4<br><br>6<br><br>8<br><br>10<br><br>12<br><br>14<br><br>1987<br><br>1988<br><br>1989<br><br>1990<br><br>1991<br><br>1992<br><br>1993<br><br>1994<br><br>1995<br><br>1996<br><br>1997<br><br>1998<br><br>1999<br><br>2000<br><br>2001<br><br>2002<br><br>2003<br><br>2004<br><br>2005<br><br>2006<br><br>2007<br><br>2008<br><br>2009<br><br>2010<br><br>2011<br><br>2012<br><br>2013<br><br>2014<br><br>2015<br><br>2016<br><br>2017|
|---|


2001

2010

1987

1988

1989

1990

1991

1992

1993

1994

1995

1996

1997

1998

1999

2000

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

2017

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

- Fig. 1 Number of eligible hot spots policing studies by year (N = 65)


- Table 1 Characteristics of eligible hot spots policing evaluations


Characteristic N Percent

Evaluation country (N = 65) United States 51 78.5 United Kingdom 4 6.2 Sweden 4 6.2 Othera 6 9.2

City population (N = 65)

Small (< 200,000 residents) 12 18.5 Medium (200,000–500,000 residents) 27 41.5 Large (> 500,000 residents) 25 38.5 Small and large 1 1.5

Publication type (N = 65)

Peer-reviewed article 36 55.4 Published report 16 24.6 Thesis/dissertation 7 10.8 Unpublished report/working paper 6 9.2

Evaluation type (N = 65)

Randomized controlled trial 27 41.5 Quasi-experimental 38 58.5

Intervention type (N = 78)

Problem-oriented policing 27 34.6 Increased policing 51 65.4

Displacement/diffusion effects (N = 78)

Measured displacement/diffusion 46 59.0 Did not measure displacement/diffusion 32 41.0

a Argentina, Australia, Colombia, Denmark, India, and Trinidad and Tobago

spots policing evaluations were conducted in the United Kingdom and four eligible studies were completed in Sweden. One hot spots policing evaluation was conducted in each of the following countries: Argentina, Australia, Colombia, Denmark, India, and Trinidad & Tobago. Twenty-seven studies (41.5%) were completed in medium-sized cities with between 200,000 and 500,000 residents, 25 studies (38.5%) were completed in large cities with more than 500,000 residents, and 12 studies were completed in smaller cities with less than 200,000 residents (18.5%). One study included both a large and small city in the designated study area (1.5%): Lum et al. (2011a) evaluated the impact of license plate reader technology in crime hot spots located in Alexandria City and the eastern portion of Fairfax County (VA).

Thirty-six of the eligible hot spots policing studies were published in peerreviewed journals (55.4%), 16 were available as published reports (24.6%), 7 were available as unpublished theses/dissertations (10.8%), and 6 were available as unpublished reports or working papers (9.2%). Twenty-seven eligible studies used randomized controlled trials (41.5%) and 38 eligible studies used quasiexperimental research designs (58.5%) to evaluate the effects of hot spots policing on crime. Eleven of the 65 eligible studies evaluated more than one hot spots policing intervention and carried out these analyses as independent tests. Nine studies examined two separate hot spots policing interventions and two studies examined three hot spots policing interventions. For instance, the seminal Minneapolis RECAP experiment separately evaluated problem-oriented policing interventions at residential and commercial addresses (Sherman et al. 1989b). More recently, Blattman et al. (2017) evaluated the impacts of increased police patrol and, separately, increased police patrol plus municipal services on high-crime street segments in Bogotá, Colombia. In total, the 65 studies included in this review yielded 78 independent experimental and quasiexperimental tests of hot spots policing on crime.

Across the 78 tests of hot spots policing, the specific types of hot spots policing interventions fit broadly into two categories: problem-oriented policing and increased traditional policing. More than one third of hot spots policing programs focused primarily on reducing crime opportunities at places by engaging strategies consistent with problem-oriented policing (N = 27, 34.6%). In these studies, the problem-oriented policing strategies generally attempted to change the underlying conditions and situational dynamics that caused problems to recur in high-activity crime places (Goldstein 1990; Braga 2008). Increased traditional policing was used in two-thirds of the eligible hot spots policing (N = 51, 65.4%). These programs were generally designed to deter offenders from committing crimes in hot spots areas by increasing police presence and enforcement activities. This was most commonly attempted through increased foot or vehicle patrol (N = 31), drug enforcement operations (N = 6), offenderfocused apprehension programs (N = 4), actively monitored CCTV with directed patrol (N = 3), and other kinds of increased enforcement activities (N = 7).6 Crime displacement and diffusion of crime control benefits effects were assessed for 46 of the 78 tests of hot spots policing (58.9%).

- 6 These activities included roadblocks, patrol with license plate reader technology, zero-tolerance policing, and increased gun searches and seizures.


A noteworthy majority of the hot spots policing evaluations concluded that hot spots policing programs generated significant crime control benefits in the treatment areas relative to the control areas.7 Only 16 of the 78 (20.5%) tests of hot spots policing interventions did not report noteworthy crime control gains associated with the approach. Sixty-two of the 78 tests (79.5%) of hot spots policing interventions in the 65 eligible studies reported noteworthy crime control gains.

Meta-analysis of the effects of hot spots policing on crime

Our meta-analyses of the effects of hot spots policing programs on crime were limited to 62 of the 65 eligible studies. Two studies, the St. Louis Problem-Oriented Policing in Three Drug Market Locations Study (Hope 1994) and the Beenleigh (Australia) Calls for Service Project (Criminal Justice Commission 1998), did not report the necessary information to calculate program effect sizes. The Houston (TX) Targeted Beat Program (Caeti 1999) did not use appropriate statistical methods to estimate program effects and, unfortunately, accurate effect sizes could not be calculated. We were able to calculate effect sizes for 73 main effects tests and 40 displacement and diffusion tests in these 65 eligible studies.

Using the overall mean effect size from each study for 73 main effects tests, the forest plot in Fig. 2 shows the standardized difference in means between the treatment and control or comparison conditions (effect size) with a 95% confidence interval plotted around them for all tests. Points plotted to the right of 0 indicate a treatment effect; in this case, the test showed a reduction in crime or disorder. Points to the left of 0 indicate a backfire effect where control conditions improved relative to treatment conditions. A random effects model was used to estimate the overall mean effect size based on an a priori assumption of a heterogeneous distribution of effect sizes.8 The meta-analysis of effect sizes suggests an effect in favor of hot spots policing strategies. Notably, the overall effect size for these studies is .132 (p < .001); this would be considered a small mean effect size (see Cohen 1988).

Fifty-seven tests reported effect sizes that favored treatment conditions over control conditions (78.1% of 73 total tests).9 For the largest effect size meta-analysis, the overall standardized mean difference effect size was .197 and statistically significant at the p < .05 level. For the smallest effect size meta-analysis, the overall standardized mean difference effect size was .104 and statistically significant at the p < .05 level.

- Table 2 presents mean effect sizes for the effects of hot spots policing programs on violent crime, property crime, drug offense, and disorder offense outcomes. Hot spots policing programs produced statistically significant (p < .05) positive mean effect sizes


- 7 Readers interested in reviewing the details of the eligible studies should consult the full report to the Campbell Collaboration. In that report, Table 2 summarizes the treatments, hot spots definitions, and research designs. Table 3 summarizes the main effects of the intervention on crime and disorder measures, treatment effects as measured by other non-official data sources, and, if measured, the immediate spatial displacement and diffusion of crime control benefits effects. A narrative review of the 65 hot spots policing studies and the 78 tests contained in the eligible studies is provided in Appendix C. (see Braga et al. 2019).
- 8 For the overall main effects meta-analysis, Q = 362.714, df = 72, p < 0.001 and I2 = 80.150.
- 9 Random effects models were used to estimate the overall standardized mean effect sizes. For the largest effect size meta-analysis, Q = 437.268, df = 72, p < 0.001, I2 = 83.534. For the smallest effect size metaanalysis, Q = 431.914, df = 72, p < 0.001, I2 = 83.330.


Study name Outcome Std diff in means and 95% CI

Std diff Standard in means error

Trafford Burglary Burglary incidents 0.977 0.207 KC Gun Gun crimes 0.866 0.275 Phila. Drug Corners Combined 0.855 0.258 Port St. Lucie Tactical Combined 0.718 0.178 St. Louis Patrol Calls for service 0.630 0.244 LA LASER Total crime incidents 0.618 0.232 Buenos Aires Police Motor vehicle theft incidents 0.617 0.169 St. Louis Gun E-Patrol Combined 0.532 0.255 JC Disp. Prost. Prostitution events 0.525 0.149 St. Louis POP Calls for service 0.476 0.244 DDACTS Flint Violent crime incidents 0.459 0.542 JC Disp. Drug Drug events 0.441 0.131 Minn. RECAP Resid. Total calls 0.369 0.132 SCI Los Angeles Combined 0.355 0.114 Newark Foot Patrol Violent incidents 0.352 0.148 Sacramento Patrol Combined 0.345 0.311 Boston SST Total violent incidents 0.341 0.020 Eskilstuna POP Assault incidents 0.326 0.197 Rajasthan CheckpointsCombined 0.316 0.149 Stockholm POP Robbery incidents 0.308 0.197 Oakland Beat Health Drug calls 0.279 0.056 Camden Suppression Total crime incidents 0.276 0.161 Newark A-CCTV Combined 0.270 0.223 Port St. Lucie Offender Crime incidents 0.251 0.290 Mesa LPR Patrol Combined 0.242 0.245 DDACTS Kansas Total crime incidents 0.241 0.094 Bogota Patrol / MunicipalCrime incidents 0.239 0.117 Newark RTM Gun violence incidents 0.237 0.174 New Haven SPI Total crime incidents 0.236 0.196 St. Louis Gun Patrol Combined 0.234 0.251 Phila. Tactics Offender Violent crime incidents 0.225 0.071 Colorado Springs RTM Auto theft incidents 0.223 0.156 Peterborough Patrol Combined 0.201 0.237 Suburban MCT Total crime incidents 0.189 0.152 Dallas AVL Patrol Total crime incidents 0.176 0.063 JC DMAP Combined 0.147 0.270 Lowell POP Total calls 0.145 0.034 JC POP Combined 0.143 0.043 Phila. Foot Patrol Violent incidents 0.143 0.021 NY Impact Crime incidents 0.132 0.009 Mesa Patrol / Surv. Combined 0.130 0.244 Pittsburgh Bar Raids Drug calls 0.125 0.038 West Midlands Patrol Combined 0.122 0.190 T&T Directed Patrol Violent crime incidents 0.106 0.032 Buffalo Strikeforce Combined 0.099 0.078 NYC TNT 67 Combined 0.087 0.077 Glendale SPI Calls for service 0.082 0.019 Kansas City RTM Agg. violence incidents 0.072 0.156 Lowell SPI Property incidents 0.072 0.050 Minn. Patrol Total calls 0.061 0.015 KC Crack Total calls 0.051 0.039 Buffalo Raids Total calls 0.050 0.117 KC Foot Patrol Violent crime incidents 0.036 0.055 Bogota Patrol Crime incidents 0.031 0.046 Copenhagen POP Total crime incidents 0.028 0.033 Phila. Tactics Foot Violent crime incidents 0.020 0.059 Minn. RECAP Comm. Total calls 0.015 0.137 N. VA LPR Total crime incidents 0.004 0.365 Jacksonville POP Combined -0.005 0.092 London Bus Stops Combined -0.006 0.200 Phila. Pred. Marked Combined -0.015 0.067 DC Summer Crime Robbery calls -0.024 0.138 NYC TNT 70 Combined -0.027 0.080 Suburban LA disorder Combined -0.027 0.193 Phila. Tactics POP Violent crime incidents -0.048 0.059 Jacksonville Patrol Combined -0.055 0.096 Phila. Pred. Unmarked Combined -0.056 0.065 Sweden A-CCTV Violent crime incidents -0.062 0.043 DDACTS Nevada Combined -0.067 0.117 Malmo A-CCTV Street assaults -0.134 0.235 Glendale RTM Agg. violence incidents -0.181 0.221 Phila. GunStat Violent crime incidents -0.199 0.079 Palos Verde Team Total calls -0.321 0.106

| | |
|---|---|
| | |


0.132 0.017

-2.00 -1.00

0.00 1.00 2.00

Favors control Favors treatment

- Fig. 2 Combined effect sizes for study outcomes


Table 2 The effects of hot spots policing on specific crime types

Crime category N studies Effect size 95% C.I.

Violent crimes 44 .102* .047, .156 Property crimes 26 .124* .063, .185 Disorder offenses 15 .161* .101, .220 Drug offenses 10 .244* .114, .373

Note: Random effects meta-analysis models used in all reported effect sizes

*p < .05

for violent crime outcomes (.102), property crime outcomes (.124), disorder outcomes (.161), and drug crime outcomes (.244).

Meta-analysis of crime displacement and diffusion effects

Crime displacement and diffusion effects were analyzed jointly as two sides of a single distribution that ranged from harmful to beneficial effects. Using the overall mean effect size from each study for 40 displacement and diffusion tests, the forest plots in

- Fig. 3 show the standardized difference in means between the treatment and control or comparison conditions (effect size) with a 95% confidence interval plotted around them for all tests. Points plotted to the right of 0 indicate a diffusion of crime control benefits effect; in this case, the test showed a reduction in crime or disorder in the areas surrounding the targeted hot spots. Points to the left of 0 indicate a crime displacement effect. We used a random effects model to estimate the overall mean effect size.10 The meta-analysis suggests a small but statistically significant overall diffusion of crime control benefits effect (.086) generated by the hot spots policing strategies (p < .001). Evaluation design and program type as effect size moderators


Given the important distinction in methodological quality between the randomized controlled trials and quasi-experimental evaluation studies, we also examined research design as a moderator variable. It is well known among social scientists that program evaluations with more rigorous research designs tend to report null effects (see, e.g., Rossi 1987). Figure 4 presents a random effects model examining the two different classes of evaluation designs included in this review.11 Prior research has suggested that weaker designs are more likely to report stronger effects in crime and justice studies (Weisburd et al. 2001; Welsh et al. 2011). However, the purported relationship between quasi-experimental designs and larger effect sizes has not been universally found. Other studies have found that well-designed quasi-experiments can produce effect size similar

- 10 Random effects models were used to estimate the overall displacement and diffusion standardized mean effect sizes: Q = 22850.673, df = 39, p < 0.001, I2 = 99.829.
- 11 We used a random effects model for this comparison. For the quasi-experiments, Q = 267.626, df = 37, p < 0.001, I2 = 86.175. For the randomized controlled trials, Q = 69.379, df = 34, p < 0.001, I2 = 50.994. For the overall analysis, the Between Group Q = 8.159, df = 1, p < 0.004, suggesting that the type of evaluation produced statistically-significant differences in observed crime outcomes. The moderated overall effect size was .128 (Standard error = 0.017, p < .001, 95% CI = .094, .162).


Study name Outcome Std diff in means and 95% CI

Std diff Standard in means error

Phila. Drug Corners Combined 0.580 0.065 JC Disp. Prost. Combined 0.395 0.019 SCI Los Angeles Crime incidents 0.390 0.114 Port St. Lucie Tactical Combined 0.363 0.208 Newark Foot Patrol Violent crime incidents 0.352 0.148 Malmo A-CCTV Street assault incidents 0.272 0.256 Bogota Patrol / Municipal Crime incidents 0.239 0.118 Phila. Tactics Offender Violent crime incidents 0.191 0.083 KC Foot Patrol Violent incidents 0.189 0.055 London Bus Stops Combined 0.167 0.200 JC DMAP Combined 0.161 0.269 Glendale RTM Agg. violence incidents 0.161 0.150 Oakland Beat Health Drug calls 0.160 0.035 JC Disp. Drug Combined 0.124 0.015 Colorado Springs RTM MV theft incidents 0.120 0.118 Newark RTM Gun violence incidents 0.120 0.106 Stockholm POP Robbery incidents 0.109 0.196 DC Summer Crime Robbery calls 0.104 0.183 Camden Suppression Crime incidents 0.102 0.120 Phila. Pred. Marked Property incidents 0.088 0.066 NY Impact Crime incidents 0.074 0.008 Buenos Aires Police Combined 0.051 0.082 JC POP Combined 0.049 0.001 St. Louis Gun E-Patrol Gun violence incidents 0.025 0.250 Newark A-CCTV Combined 0.019 0.199 Lowell POP Total calls 0.013 0.001 Peterborough Patrol Crime incidents 0.010 0.046 Boston SST Violent incidents 0.009 0.000 Glendale SPI Calls for service 0.006 0.063 Phila. Pred. Unmarked Property incidents -0.015 0.066 Bogota Patrol Crime incidents -0.025 0.047 KC Gun Gun crimes -0.044 0.263 Jacksonville POP Combined -0.050 0.167 Phila. Foot Patrol Violent incidents -0.057 0.000 Sweden A-CCTV Violent incidents -0.075 0.057 Mesa LPR Patrol Combined -0.077 0.245 Jacksonville Patrol Combined -0.088 0.196 Sacramento Patrol Combined -0.157 0.100 Palos Verde Team Calls for service -0.163 0.102 Mesa Patrol / Surv. Combined -0.248 0.244

| | | |
|---|---|---|
| | | |


| | | |
|---|---|---|
| | | |


| | | |
|---|---|---|
| | | |


| | | |
|---|---|---|
| | | |


| | | |
|---|---|---|
| | | |


| | |
|---|---|
| | |


0.086 0.012

-2.00 -1.00 0.00 1.00 2.00

Favors control Favors treatment

- Fig. 3 Combined effects sizes for displacement and diffusion outcomes


in magnitude to randomized experiments (e.g., see Lipsey and Wilson 2001; Shadish and Ragsdale 1996). In this review, the quasi-experimental designs were associated with a larger within-group effect size (.171, p < .001) relative to the randomized controlled trial designs (.109, p < .001).

Our narrative review documented two general types of programs that represented fundamentally different orientations in dealing with the problems of high-activity crime places. Problem-oriented policing programs attempt to change the underlying conditions at hot spots that cause them to generate recurring crime problems (Goldstein 1990; Braga and Weisburd 2010). The other hot spots policing interventions applied increased traditional policing activities concentrated at specific places to prevent crime through general deterrence and increased risk of apprehension (Nagin et al. 2015).

Group by Design

Study name Outcome Std diff in means and 95% CI

Std diff Standard in means error

Quasi Trafford Burglary Burglary incidents 0.977 0.207 Quasi KC Gun Gun crimes 0.866 0.275 Quasi Phila. Drug Corners Combined 0.855 0.258 Quasi Port St. Lucie Tactical Combined 0.718 0.178 Quasi LA LASER Total crime incidents 0.618 0.232 Quasi Buenos Aires Police Motor vehicle theft incidents 0.617 0.169 Quasi JC Disp. Prost. Prostitution events 0.525 0.149 Quasi DDACTS Flint Violent crime incidents 0.459 0.542 Quasi New Haven SPI Combined 0.451 0.256 Quasi JC Disp. Drug Drug events 0.441 0.131 Quasi SCI Los Angeles Combined 0.355 0.114 Quasi Newark Foot Patrol Violent incidents 0.352 0.148 Quasi Boston SST Total violent incidents 0.341 0.020 Quasi Eskilstuna POP Assault incidents 0.326 0.197 Quasi Stockholm POP Robbery incidents 0.308 0.197 Quasi Camden Suppression Combined 0.291 0.272 Quasi DDACTS Kansas Combined 0.269 0.202 Quasi Port St. Lucie Offender Crime incidents 0.251 0.290 Quasi Newark RTM Gun violence incidents 0.237 0.174 Quasi Colorado Springs RTM Auto theft incidents 0.223 0.156 Quasi Pittsburgh Bar Raids Drug calls 0.125 0.038 Quasi West Midlands Patrol Combined 0.122 0.190 Quasi NY Impact Combined 0.114 0.012 Quasi Buffalo Strikeforce Combined 0.099 0.078 Quasi NYC TNT 67 Combined 0.087 0.077 Quasi Glendale SPI Calls for service 0.082 0.019 Quasi Kansas City RTM Agg. violence incidents 0.072 0.156 Quasi Lowell SPI Property incidents 0.072 0.050 Quasi KC Foot Patrol Violent crime incidents 0.036 0.055 Quasi Buffalo Raids Combined 0.035 0.117 Quasi DC Summer Crime Robbery calls -0.024 0.138 Quasi NYC TNT 70 Combined -0.027 0.080 Quasi Sweden A-CCTV Violent crime incidents -0.062 0.043 Quasi DDACTS Nevada Combined -0.067 0.117 Quasi Malmo A-CCTV Street assaults -0.134 0.235 Quasi Glendale RTM Agg. violence incidents -0.181 0.221 Quasi Phila. GunStat Violent crime incidents -0.199 0.079 Quasi Palos Verde Team Total calls -0.321 0.106 Quasi 0.171 0.031 RCT St. Louis Patrol Calls for service 0.630 0.244 RCT St. Louis Gun E-Patrol Combined 0.532 0.255 RCT St. Louis POP Calls for service 0.476 0.244 RCT Minn. RECAP Resid. Total calls 0.369 0.132 RCT Sacramento Patrol Combined 0.345 0.311 RCT Rajasthan CheckpointsCombined 0.316 0.149 RCT Oakland Beat Health Drug calls 0.279 0.056 RCT Newark A-CCTV Combined 0.270 0.223 RCT Mesa LPR Patrol Combined 0.242 0.245 RCT Bogota Patrol / MunicipalCrime incidents 0.239 0.117 RCT St. Louis Gun Patrol Combined 0.234 0.251 RCT Phila. Tactics Offender Violent crime incidents 0.225 0.071 RCT JC POP Combined 0.217 0.122 RCT Peterborough Patrol Combined 0.201 0.237 RCT Lowell POP Combined 0.195 0.125 RCT Suburban MCT Total crime incidents 0.189 0.152 RCT Dallas AVL Patrol Total crime incidents 0.176 0.063 RCT JC DMAP Combined 0.147 0.270 RCT Phila. Foot Patrol Violent incidents 0.143 0.021 RCT Mesa Patrol / Surv. Combined 0.130 0.244 RCT T&T Directed Patrol Violent crime incidents 0.106 0.032 RCT Copenhagen POP Combined 0.083 0.109 RCT KC Crack Combined 0.072 0.097 RCT Minn. Patrol Combined 0.054 0.021 RCT Bogota Patrol Crime incidents 0.031 0.046 RCT Phila. Tactics Foot Violent crime incidents 0.020 0.059 RCT Minn. RECAP Comm. Total calls 0.015 0.137 RCT London Bus Stops Combined -0.006 0.200 RCT Jacksonville POP Combined -0.012 0.102 RCT Phila. Pred. Marked Combined -0.015 0.067 RCT Suburban LA disorder Combined -0.027 0.193 RCT Phila. Tactics POP Violent crime incidents -0.048 0.059 RCT Phila. Pred. Unmarked Combined -0.056 0.065 RCT Jacksonville Patrol Combined -0.067 0.108 RCT N. VA LPR Combined -0.082 0.365 RCT 0.109 0.021 Overall 0.128 0.017

-2.00 -1.00 0.00 1.00 2.00

Favors control Favors treatment

- Fig. 4 Research Design Type as Moderator for Study Outcomes


There is, of course, some overlap between the enforcement interventions employed by the problem-oriented policing hot spots programs and the actions taken by the increased policing hot spots programs. Nonetheless, program type represented a potentially

influential moderator of the observed effect sizes in our overall meta-analysis. Figure 5 presents a random effects model examining the two different hot spots policing program types: problem-oriented policing and increased policing.12 Our meta-analysis revealed that problem-oriented policing programs produced a modestly larger overall mean effect size (.164, p < .001) relative to the size of the overall mean effect size generated by increased traditional policing programs (.108, p < .001).

Publication bias

Publication bias, generally defined as the concern that the collection of studies easily available to a reviewer represents those studies most likely to have statistically significant results, presents a strong challenge to any review of evaluation studies (Rothstein 2008). The credibility of a review arguably depends more heavily on the collection of studies reviewed than on which statistical methods of synthesis are used (Wilson 2009). Similar to the problem of a biased study sample leading to biased results in an individual study, a biased collection of studies will potentially lead to biased conclusions in a systematic review (Rothstein and Hopewell 2009). Our search strategies were explicitly designed to mitigate the potential effects of publication bias on our analyses. Indeed, it is encouraging that nearly half of the eligible studies (29 of 65, 44.6%) were acquired through gray literature sources such as published reports, theses, dissertations, unpublished reports, and unpublished working papers. The studies identified through gray literature sources reported a much smaller overall mean effect size (.060, p < .001) when compared to the overall mean effect size (.200, p < .001) reported by studies in published journal articles, suggesting that our search strategies were successful in identifying a range of hot spots policing studies with varying effects on crime outcomes.13

Like many systematic reviews, our meta-analyses used the trim-and-fill procedure to explore whether publication bias might be affecting the results and to estimate how the reported effects would change if the bias were to be removed (Duval 2005; Duval and Tweedie 2000). The diagnostic funnel plot is based on the idea that, in the absence of bias, the plot of study effect sizes should be symmetric about the mean effect size. If there is asymmetry, the trim-and-fill procedure imputes the missing studies, adds them to the analysis, and then re-computes the mean effect size. Trim-and-fill procedures do suffer from some well-known limitations that could result in the underestimation or overestimation of publication bias (Rothstein 2008; Simonsohn et al. 2014). Nonetheless, this approach does provide reviewers with a well-understood measure of the possible influence of bias on their meta-analytic results.

- 12 For problem-oriented policing programs, Q = 179.543, df = 24, p < 0.001, I2 = 86.632. For increased policing programs, Q = 162.328, df = 47, p < 0.001, I2 = 71.046. The between Q = 20.852, df = 1, p < 0.001, suggesting that the hot spots policing program type produced statistically-significant differences in observed crime outcomes. The moderated overall effect size was .120 (Standard error = 0.017, p < .001, 95% CI = .086,

.153).

- 13 The 29 gray literature studies included 32 independent tests of hot spots policing programs and the 36 journal article studies included 41 independent tests of hot spots policing programs. For gray literature studies, Q = 73.908, df = 31, p < 0.001, I2 = 58.056. For journal article studies, Q = 228.913, df = 40, p < 0.001, I2 = 82.526. The between Q = 42.342, df = 1, p < 0.001, suggesting that the publication type produced statistically-significant differences in observed crime outcomes. The moderated overall effect size was .125 (Standard error = 0.018, p < .001, 95% CI = .089, .161).


Group by Program Type

Study name Outcome Std diff in means and 95% CI

Std diff Standard in means error

Increased Policing Trafford Burglary Burglary incidents 0.977 0.207 Increased Policing KC Gun Gun crimes 0.866 0.275 Increased Policing Phila. Drug Corners Combined 0.855 0.258 Increased Policing Port St. Lucie Tactical Combined 0.718 0.178 Increased Policing St. Louis Patrol Calls for service 0.630 0.244 Increased Policing LA LASER Total crime incidents 0.618 0.232 Increased Policing Buenos Aires Police Motor vehicle theft incidents 0.617 0.169 Increased Policing St. Louis Gun E-Patrol Combined 0.532 0.255 Increased Policing DDACTS Flint Violent crime incidents 0.459 0.542 Increased Policing Newark Foot Patrol Violent incidents 0.352 0.148 Increased Policing Sacramento Patrol Combined 0.345 0.311 Increased Policing Rajasthan CheckpointsCombined 0.316 0.149 Increased Policing Camden Suppression Total crime incidents 0.276 0.161 Increased Policing Newark A-CCTV Combined 0.270 0.223 Increased Policing Port St. Lucie Offender Crime incidents 0.251 0.290 Increased Policing Mesa LPR Patrol Combined 0.242 0.245 Increased Policing DDACTS Kansas Total crime incidents 0.241 0.094 Increased Policing St. Louis Gun Patrol Combined 0.234 0.251 Increased Policing Phila. Tactics Offender Violent crime incidents 0.225 0.071 Increased Policing Peterborough Patrol Combined 0.201 0.237 Increased Policing Suburban MCT Total crime incidents 0.189 0.152 Increased Policing Dallas AVL Patrol Total crime incidents 0.176 0.063 Increased Policing Phila. Foot Patrol Violent incidents 0.143 0.021 Increased Policing NY Impact Crime incidents 0.132 0.009 Increased Policing Mesa Patrol / Surv. Combined 0.130 0.244 Increased Policing Pittsburgh Bar Raids Drug calls 0.125 0.038 Increased Policing West Midlands Patrol Combined 0.122 0.190 Increased Policing T&T Directed Patrol Violent crime incidents 0.106 0.032 Increased Policing Buffalo Strikeforce Combined 0.099 0.078 Increased Policing NYC TNT 67 Combined 0.087 0.077 Increased Policing Minn. Patrol Total calls 0.061 0.015 Increased Policing KC Crack Total calls 0.051 0.039 Increased Policing Buffalo Raids Total calls 0.050 0.117 Increased Policing KC Foot Patrol Violent crime incidents 0.036 0.055 Increased Policing Bogota Patrol Crime incidents 0.031 0.046 Increased Policing Phila. Tactics Foot Violent crime incidents 0.020 0.059 Increased Policing N. VA LPR Total crime incidents 0.004 0.365 Increased Policing London Bus Stops Combined -0.006 0.200 Increased Policing Phila. Pred. Marked Combined -0.015 0.067 Increased Policing DC Summer Crime Robbery calls -0.024 0.138 Increased Policing NYC TNT 70 Combined -0.027 0.080 Increased Policing Jacksonville Patrol Combined -0.055 0.096 Increased Policing Phila. Pred. Unmarked Combined -0.056 0.065 Increased Policing Sweden A-CCTV Violent crime incidents -0.062 0.043 Increased Policing DDACTS Nevada Combined -0.067 0.117 Increased Policing Malmo A-CCTV Street assaults -0.134 0.235 Increased Policing Glendale RTM Agg. violence incidents -0.181 0.221 Increased Policing Phila. GunStat Violent crime incidents -0.199 0.079 Increased Policing 0.108 0.019 Problem-Oriented JC Disp. Prost. Prostitution events 0.525 0.149 Problem-Oriented St. Louis POP Calls for service 0.476 0.244 Problem-Oriented JC Disp. Drug Drug events 0.441 0.131 Problem-Oriented Minn. RECAP Resid. Total calls 0.369 0.132 Problem-Oriented SCI Los Angeles Combined 0.355 0.114 Problem-Oriented Boston SST Total violent incidents 0.341 0.020 Problem-Oriented Eskilstuna POP Assault incidents 0.326 0.197 Problem-Oriented Stockholm POP Robbery incidents 0.308 0.197 Problem-Oriented Oakland Beat Health Drug calls 0.279 0.056 Problem-Oriented Bogota Patrol / MunicipalCrime incidents 0.239 0.117 Problem-Oriented Newark RTM Gun violence incidents 0.237 0.174 Problem-Oriented New Haven SPI Total crime incidents 0.236 0.196 Problem-Oriented Colorado Springs RTMAuto theft incidents 0.223 0.156 Problem-Oriented JC DMAP Combined 0.147 0.270 Problem-Oriented Lowell POP Total calls 0.145 0.034 Problem-Oriented JC POP Combined 0.143 0.043 Problem-Oriented Glendale SPI Calls for service 0.082 0.019 Problem-Oriented Kansas City RTM Agg. violence incidents 0.072 0.156 Problem-Oriented Lowell SPI Property incidents 0.072 0.050 Problem-Oriented Copenhagen POP Total crime incidents 0.028 0.033 Problem-Oriented Minn. RECAP Comm. Total calls 0.015 0.137 Problem-Oriented Jacksonville POP Combined -0.005 0.092 Problem-Oriented Suburban LA disorder Combined -0.027 0.193 Problem-Oriented Phila. Tactics POP Violent crime incidents -0.048 0.059 Problem-Oriented Palos Verde Team Total calls -0.321 0.106 Problem-Oriented 0.164 0.037 Overall 0.120 0.017

-2.00 -1.00 0.00 1.00 2.00

Favors control Favors treatment

- Fig. 5 Program Type as Moderator for Study Outcomes


Avisual inspection of the resulting funnel plot indicated some asymmetry with more studies with a large effect and a large standard error to the right of the mean than the left of the mean. The trim-and-fill procedure determined that 11 studies should be added to create symmetry. The funnel plot with imputed studies is presented in Fig. 6. Using a

random effects model, the mean random effect decreased from 0.132 (95% CI = 0.097, 0.165) to 0.103 (95% CI = 0.067, 0.138). Indeed, the 95% confidence intervals substantially overlap, suggesting that the underlying parameters may not be different. Nevertheless, the trim-and-fill result suggests mild publication selection bias. However, the adjusted mean effect size remained a similar statistically-significant small size and, as such, the observed publication bias does not appear to be sufficient to nullify the results (as suggested by the funnel plot in Fig. 6).

Conclusion

The results of this ongoing systematic review once again support the assertion that focusing police efforts at high activity crime places can be effective in preventing crime (Skogan and Frydl 2004; Weisburd and Majimundar 2018). The updated systematic review identified 78 tests of hot spots policing in 65 eligible studies. Sixty-two of the 78 tests reported noteworthy crime control gains associated with the hot spots policing interventions when treatment conditions were compared to control conditions. A metaanalysis of key reported outcome measures revealed a small but statistically significant mean effect size favoring the effects of hot spots policing in reducing crime in treatment places relative to control places. This small crime reduction effect was observed in both randomized experiments and quasi-experiments and across a diverse range of crime outcomes. When crime displacement was measured, it was very limited and unintended crime prevention benefits were more likely to be associated with the hot spots policing programs (see also Bowers et al. 2011). A meta-analysis of key reported outcome measures in 40 tests revealed a small but statistically significant mean effect size

|-2.0 -1.5 -1.0 -0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0<br><br>0.0<br><br>| | |
|---|---|
<br><br>0.1<br><br>0.2<br><br>0.3<br><br>0.4<br><br>0.5<br><br>0.6<br><br>Standard Error<br><br>Std diff in means<br><br>Funnel Plot of Standard Error by Std diff in means|
|---|


- Fig. 6 The funnel plot with imputed studies. Note: Empty circles are the original studies. Filled-in circles indicate 11 imputed studies from the trim-and-fill analysis. These additional studies only slightly changed the mean effect size estimate. Using a random effects model, decreased from 0.132 (95% CI = 0.097, 0.165) to 0.103 (95% CI = 0.067, 0.138)


favoring a diffusion of crime control benefits rather than a crime displacement effect.The updated meta-analysis found that problem-oriented policing interventions seemed to generate moderately larger overall effect sizes when compared to the increased policing interventions. While increasing presence and concentrating traditional enforcement activities constitute an effective police response to crime hot spots, it seems likely that altering place characteristics and dynamics will produce larger crime prevention benefits (Braga and Weisburd 2010). We believe that the problem-oriented policing approach holds great promise in developing tailored responses to very specific recurring problems at crime hot spots. While it is difficult for police agencies to implement the “ideal” version of problem-oriented policing (Cordner and Biebel 2005; Eck 2006), the available evidence suggests that even “shallow” problem solving better focuses police crime prevention efforts at crime hot spots (Braga and Weisburd 2006).

References

Ariel, B., & Partridge, H. (2016). Predictable policing: Measuring the crime control benefits of hotspots policing at bus stops. Journal of Quantitative Criminology, 33(4), 809–833 1–25 [available online]. Ariel, B., Weinborn, C., & Sherman, L. W. (2016). “Soft” policing at hot spots Do police community

support officers work? A randomized controlled trial. Journal of Experimental Criminology, 12, 277 317. Attermann, C. V. (2017). Investigating hot spots policing. Copenhagen: Ministry of Justice Research Office. Banerjee, A.V., Duflo, E., Keniston, D., & Singh, N. (2014). The efficient deployment of police resources:

Theory and new evidence from a randomized drunk driving crackdown in India. [working paper]. Beck, J. W. (2010). The effects of directed patrols in unincorporated areas: A case study of the Data-Driven Approach to Crime and Traffic Safety. Reno: University of Nevada. Berk, R., & MacDonald, J. (2010). Policing the homeless: An evaluation of efforts to reduce homeless-related crime. Criminology & Public Policy, 9, 813 840. Blattman, C., Green, D., Ortega, D., & Tobón, S. (2017). Pushing crime around the corner? Estimating experimental impacts of large-scale security interventions. [working paper]. Bond, B. J., Hajjar, L., Ryan, A., & White, M. D. (2014). Lowell, Massachusetts, Smart Policing Initiative: Reducing property crime in targeted hot spots. Washington, DC: Bureau of Justice Assistance. Bowers, K., Johnson, S., Guerette, R., Summers, L., & Poynton, S. (2011). Spatial displacement and diffusion of benefits among geographically focused policing initiatives. Campbell Systematic Reviews 3. Braga, A. (2001). The effects of hot spots policing on crime. The Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science, 578, 104–125. Braga, A. (2005). Hot spots policing and crime prevention: A systematic review of randomized controlled trials. Journal of Experimental Criminology, 1, 317–342. Braga, A. (2007). The effects of hot spots policing on crime. Campbell Systematic Reviews. https://doi. org/10.4073/csr.2007.1. Braga, A. A. (2008). Problem-oriented policing and crime prevention (2nd ed.). Monsey: Criminal Justice Press. Braga, A. A. (2016). The science and practice of hot spots policing. In T. G. Blomberg, J. M. Brancale, K. M.

Beaver, & W. D. Bales (Eds.), Advancing criminology and criminal justice policy. New York: Routledge. Braga, A. A., Andresen, M. A., & Lawton, B. (2017). The law of crime concentration at places: Editors’

introduction. Journal of Quantitative Criminology, 33, 421 426. Braga, A. A., & Bond, B. (2008). Policing crime and disorder hot spots: A randomized controlled trial. Criminology, 46, 577–608. Braga, A. A., Hureau, D. M., & Papachristos, A. V. (2011). An ex-post-facto evaluation framework for placebased police interventions. Evaluation Review, 35, 592 562. Braga, A.A., Papachristos, A.V., & Hureau, D.M. (2012). Hot spots policing effects on crime. Campbell Systematic Reviews, 8, https://doi.org/10.4073/csr.2012.8 Braga, A. A., Papachristos, A. V., & Hureau, D. M. (2014). The effects of hot spots policing on crime: An updated systematic review and meta-analysis. Justice Quarterly, 31, 633 663.

Braga, A. A., & Schnell, C. (2018). Beyond putting ‘cops on dots’: Applying theory to advance police responses to crime places. In J. E. Eck & D. Weisburd (Eds.), Connecting crime to place: New directions in theory and policy, Advances in Criminological Theory (22nd ed.). New Brunswick: Transaction Press.

Braga, A.A., Turchan, B., Papachristos, A.V., & Hureau, D.M. (2019). Hot spots policing of small geographic areas effects on crime. Campbell Systematic Reviews (forthcoming).

Braga, A. A., & Weisburd, D. (2006). Problem-oriented policing: The disconnect between principles and practice. In D. Weisburd & A. Braga (Eds.), Police innovation: Contrasting perspectives (pp. 133–154). New York: Cambridge University Press.

Braga, A. A., & Weisburd, D. (2010). Policing problem places: Crime hot spots and effective prevention. New York: Oxford University Press.

Braga, A. A., & Weisburd, D. (2012). The effects of focused deterrence strategies on crime: A systematic review and meta-analysis of the empirical evidence. Journal of Research in Crime and Delinquency, 49, 323–358.

Braga, A. A., Weisburd, D., Waring, E., Mazerolle, L. G., Spelman, W., & Gajewski, F. (1999). Problemoriented policing in violent crime places: A randomized controlled experiment. Criminology, 37, 541– 580.

Braga, A. A., Welsh, B. C., & Schnell, C. (2015). Can policing disorder reduce crime? A systematic review and meta-analysis. Journal of Research in Crime and Delinquency, 52, 567–588. Bryant, K. M., Collins, G., & Villa, J. (2014). Data driven approaches to crime and traffic safety: Shawnee, Kansas 2010–2013. Washington, DC: Bureau of Justice Assistance. Caeti, T. (1999). Houston’s targeted beat program: A quasi-experimental test of police patrol strategies. Ph.D. diss., Sam Houston State University. Ann Arbor, MI: University Microfilms International. Clarke, R. V., & Weisburd, D. (1994). Diffusion of crime control benefits: Observations on the reverse of displacement. Crime Prevention Studies, 2, 165 184. Cohen, J. (1988). Statistical power analysis for the behavioral sciences (2nd ed.). Hillsdale: Lawrence Erlbaum. Cohen, J., Gorr, W., & Singh, P. (2003). Estimating intervention effects in varying risk settings: Do police raids reduce illegal drug dealing at nuisance bars? Criminology, 41, 257–292. Cordner, G., & Biebel, E. (2005). Problem-oriented policing in practice. Criminology & Public Policy, 4, 155– 180. Criminal Justice Commission. (1998). Beenleigh calls for service project: Evaluation report. Brisbane: Criminal Justice Commission. Dario, L.M. (2016). Crime at convenience stores: Assessing an in-depth problem-oriented policing initiative (Ph.D. diss.). Phoenix: Arizona State University. DiTella, R., & Schargrodsky, E. (2004). Do police reduce crime? Estimates using the allocation of police forces after a terrorist attack. American Economic Review, 94, 115 133. Durlauf, S., & Nagin, D. (2011). Imprisonment and crime: Can both be reduced? Criminology & Public Policy, 10, 13 54.

Duval, S. J. (2005). The trim and fill method. In H. R. Rothstein, A. J. Sutton, & M. Borenstein (Eds.), Publication bias in meta-analysis: Prevention, assessment, and adjustments (pp. 127 144). Chichester: Wiley.

Duval, S., & Tweedie, R. (2000). A nonparametric “trim and fill” method of accounting for publication bias in meta-analysis. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 95, 89 98.

Eck, J. (1997). Preventing crime at places. In University of Maryland & Department of Criminology and Criminal Justice (Eds.), Preventing crime: What works, what doesn’t, what’s promising (pp. 7–1–7-62). Washington, DC: Office of Justice Programs, U.S. Department of Justice.

Eck, J. (2006). Science, values, and problem-oriented policing: Why problem-oriented policing? In D. Weisburd & A. Braga (Eds.), Police innovation: Contrasting perspectives (pp. 117–132). New York: Cambridge University Press.

Farrington, D., & Petrosino, A. (2001). The Campbell collaboration crime and justice group. The Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science, 578, 35–49.

Fielding, M., & Jones, V. (2012). ‘Disrupting the optimal forager’: Predictive risk mapping and domestic burglary reduction in Trafford, Greater Manchester. International Journal of Police Science and Management, 14, 30–41.

Gerell, M. (2016). Hot spot policing with actively monitored CCTV cameras: Does it reduce Assaults in

Public Places? International Criminal Justice Review, 26, 187–201. Goldstein, H. (1990). Problem-oriented policing. Philadelphia: Temple University Press. Groff, E. R., Ratcliffe, J. H., Haberman, C. P., Sorg, E. T., Joyce, N. M., & Taylor, R. B. (2015). Does what

police do at hot spots matter? The Philadelphia Policing Tactics Experiment. Criminology, 53, 23 53.

Higginson, A., & Mazerolle, L. (2014). Legitimacy policing of places: The impact on crime and disorder. Journal of Experimental Criminology, 10, 429 457. Hope, T. (1994). Problem-oriented policing and drug market locations: Three case studies. Crime Prevention Studies, 2, 5 32.

Johnson, S. D., Guerette, R. T., & Bowers, K. (2014). Crime displacement: What we know, what we don’t know, and what it means for crime reduction. Journal of Experimental Criminology, 10, 549 571.

Kennedy, L., Caplan, J., & Piza, E. (2015). A multi-jurisdictional test of risk terrain modeling and a placebased evaluation of environmental risk-based patrol deployment strategies. Newark: Rutgers University.

Kochel, T. R., Burruss, G., & Weisburd, D. (2015). St. Louis County Hot Spots in Residential Areas (SCHIRA) Final Report: Assessing the Effects of Hot Spots Policing Strategies on Police Legitimacy, Crime, and Collective Efficacy. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Justice.

Koper, C. S., Lum, C., & Hibdon, J. (2015). The uses and impacts of mobile computing technology in hot spots policing. Evaluation Review, 39, 587–624.

Koper, C. S., Taylor, B. G., & Woods, D. J. (2013). A randomized test of initial and residual deterrence from directed patrols and use of license plate readers at crime hot spots. Journal of Experimental Criminology, 9, 213–244.

Koper, C.S. & Mayo-Wilson, E. (2012). Police strategies to reduce illegal possession and carrying of firearms: Effects on gun crime. Campbell Systematic Reviews, 11. Lawton, B., Taylor, R., & Luongo, A. (2005). Police officers on drug corners in Philadelphia, drug crime, and violent crime: Intended, diffusion, and displacement impacts. Justice Quarterly, 22, 427–451. Lipsey, M., & Wilson, D. B. (2001). Practical meta-analysis. In Applied social research methods series (Vol. 49). Thousand Oaks: Sage Publications.

Lum, C., Hibdon, J., Cave, B., Koper, C. S., & Merola, L. (2011a). License plate reader (LPR) police patrols in crime hot spots: An experimental evaluation in two adjacent jurisdictions. Journal of Experimental Criminology, 7, 321 345.

Lum, C., Koper, C. S., & Telep, C. W. (2011b). The evidence-based policing matrix. Journal of Experimental Criminology, 7, 3–26. MacDonald, J., Fagan, J., & Geller, A. (2016). The effects of local police surges on crime and arrests in New York City. PLoS One, 11(6), e0157223. Marklund, F., & Holmberg, S. (2015). Camera monitoring in Stureplan and Civic Square: Full Report. Stockholm. Sweden: Brå. Marklund, F., & Merenius, S. (2014). Policing crime “hot spots”: Results and experiences from Two Projects against Personal Abuse and Abuse. Stockholm: Brå. Martinez, N. N. (2013). Team policing revisited: A quasi-experimental evaluation in Las Vegas, Nevada. Las Vegas: University of Nevada.

Mastrofski, S.D. & Fridell, L. (n.d.). Police departments’ adoption of innovative practice. National Police Research Platform. Available: http://static1.1.sqspcdn.com/static/f/733761/26580910/1443907094233 /Department+Cha. Accessed January 3 2017

Mazeika, D.M. (2014). General and specific displacement effects of police crackdowns: Criminal events and “local” criminals (Ph.D. diss.). College Park: University of Maryland.

Mazerolle, L., Bennett, S., Davis, J., Sargeant, E., & Manning, M. (2013). Procedural justice and police legitimacy: A systematic review of the research evidence. Journal of Experimental Criminology, 9, 245 274.

Mazerolle, L., Price, J., & Roehl, J. (2000). Civil remedies and drug control: A randomized field trial in Oakland, California. Evaluation Review, 24, 212–241. Nagin, D. S., Solow, R. M., & Lum, C. (2015). Deterrence, criminal opportunities, and police. Criminology, 53, 74–100. Novak, K. J., Fox, A. M., Carr, C. M., & Spade, D. A. (2016). The efficacy of foot patrol in violent places. Journal of Experimental Criminology, 12, 465–475. Phillips, S. W., Wheeler, A., & Kim, D. (2016). The effect of police paramilitary unit raids on crime at microplaces in Buffalo, New York. International Journal of Police Science and Management, 18, 206–219. Pierce, G., Spaar, S., & Briggs, L. (1988). The character of police work: Strategic and tactical implications. Boston: Center for Applied Social Research, Northeastern University.

Piza, E., Caplan, J. M., Kennedy, L. W., & Gilchrist, A. M. (2015). The effects of merging proactive CCTV monitoring with directed police patrol: a randomized controlled trial. Journal of Experimental Criminology, 11, 43 69.

Piza, E., & O’Hara, B. A. (2014). Saturation foot-patrol in a high-violence area: A quasi- experimental evaluation. Justice Quarterly, 31, 693 718.

Police Executive Research Forum. (2008). Violent crime in America: What we know about hot spots enforcement. Washington: Police Executive Research Forum. Ratcliffe, J. H., & Breen, C. (2011). Crime diffusion and displacement: Measuring the side effects of police operations. The Professional Geographer, 63, 230 243.

Ratcliffe, J., Taniguchi, T., Groff, E., & Wood, J. (2011). The Philadelphia foot patrol experiment: A randomized controlled trial of police patrol effectiveness in violent crime hot spots. Criminology, 49, 795–831.

Ratcliffe, J., Taylor, R.B., Askey, A.P., Thomas, K., Grasso, J., & Bethel, K. (2017). The Philadelphia predictive policing experiment. [unpublished manuscript]. Reaves, B. A. (2010). Local police departments, 2007. Washington: Office of Justice Programs, Bureau of Justice Statistics. Reppetto, T. (1976). Crime prevention and the displacement phenomenon. Crime & Delinquency, 22, 166– 177.

Rosenfeld, R., Deckard, M. J., & Blackburn, E. (2014). The effects of directed patrol and self- initiated enforcement on firearm violence: A randomized controlled study of hot spot policing. Criminology, 52, 428–449.

Rossi, P. H. (1987). The iron law of evaluation and other metallic rules. Research in Social Problems and Public Policy, 4, 3 20. Rothstein, H. R. (2008). Publication bias as a threat to the validity of meta-analytic results. Journal of Experimental Criminology, 4, 61 81. Rothstein, H. R., & Hopewell, S. (2009). The grey literature. In H. Cooper, L. V. Hedges, & J. C. Valentine (Eds.), The handbook on research synthesis (2nd ed.). New York: Sage Publications. Rydberg, J., McGarrell, E.F., Norris, A., & Circo, G. (2017). Applying synthetic control to evaluate the impact of data driven approaches to crime and traffic safety on violent crime. [unpublished manuscript].

- Santos, R. G., & Santos, R. B. (2015a). An ex post facto evaluation of tactical police response in residential theft from vehicle micro-time hot spots. Journal of Quantitative Criminology, 31, 679–698.
- Santos, R. G., & Santos, R. B. (2015b). Practice-based research: Ex post facto evaluation of evidence-based police practices implemented in residential burglary micro-time hot spots. Evaluation Review, 39, 451– 479.


Santos, R. B., & Santos, R. G. (2016). Offender-focused police intervention in residential burglary and theft from vehicle hot spots: a partially blocked randomized control trial. Journal of Experimental Criminology, 12, 373–402.

Sedelmaier, C. M., & Hipple, N. K. (2016). New Haven, Connecticut Smart Policing Initiative: Employing evidence-based policing strategies to engage the community and reduce crime. Washington: Bureau of Justice Assistance.

Shadish, W. R., Cook, T. D., & Campbell, D. T. (2002). Experimental and quasi-experimental designs for generalized causal inference. Belmont: Wadsworth Cengage Learning. Shadish, W. R., & Ragsdale, K. (1996). Random versus nonrandom assignment in controlled experiments: Do you get the same answer? Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 64, 1290–1305. Sherman, L., Buerger, M., & Gartin, P. (1989a). Beyond dial-a-cop: A randomized test of repeat Call Policing (RECAP). Washington: Crime Control Institute. Sherman, L., Gartin, P., & Buerger, M. (1989b). Hot spots of predatory crime: Routine activities and the criminology of place. Criminology, 27, 27 56.

- Sherman, L., & Rogan, D. (1995a). Effects of gun seizures on gun violence: ‘Hot spots’ patrol in Kansas City. Justice Quarterly, 12, 673 694.
- Sherman, L., & Rogan, D. (1995b). Deterrent effects of police raids on crack houses: A randomized controlled experiment. Justice Quarterly, 12, 755–782.


Sherman, L., & Weisburd, D. (1995). General deterrent effects of police patrol in crime hot spots: A randomized controlled trial. Justice Quarterly, 12, 625–648. Sherman, L., Williams, S., Ariel, B., Strang, L.R., Wain, N., Slothower, M., & Norton, A. (2014). TTPS hotspot experiment: Murder, wounding, shooting data graphs. [Unpublished manuscript]. Simonsohn, U., Nelson, L., & Simmons, J. P. (2014). P-curve: A key to the file-drawer. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 143, 534–547. Skogan, W., & Frydl, K. (Eds.). (2004). Fairness and effectiveness in policing: The evidence. Committee to Review Research on Police Policy and Practices. Washington: The National Academies Press. Sorg, E. T. (2015). An ex post facto evaluation of the Philadelphia GunStat model. Philadelphia: Temple University. Sviridoff, M., Sadd, S., Curtis, R., & Grinc, R. (1992). The neighborhood effects of street-level drug enforcement: tactical narcotics teams in New York. New York: Vera Institute of Justice.

Taylor, B., Koper, C., & Woods, D. (2011). A randomized controlled trial of different policing strategies at hot spots of violent crime. Journal of Experimental Criminology, 7, 149 181.

Telep, C. W., Mitchell, R. J., & Weisburd, D. (2014a). How much time should the police spend at crime hot spots? Answers from a police agency directed randomized field trial in Sacramento, California. Justice Quarterly, 31, 905 933.

Telep, C. W., & Weisburd, D. (2012). What is known about the effectiveness of police practices in reducing crime and disorder? Police Quarterly, 15, 331–357.

Telep, C. W., Weisburd, D., Gill, C. E., Vitter, Z., & Teichman, D. (2014b). Displacement of crime and diffusion of crime control benefits in large-scale geographic areas: A systematic review. Journal of Experimental Criminology, 10, 515–548.

Uchida, C. D., & Swatt, M. L. (2013). Operation LASER and the effectiveness of hotspot patrol: A panel analysis. Police Quarterly, 16, 287–304.

Weisburd, D. (1997). Reorienting crime prevention research and policy: From causes of criminality to the context of crime. Research report. Washington, DC: National Institute of Justice, U.S. Department of Justice.

Weisburd, D. (2015). The 2014 Sutherland address: The law of crime concentration and the criminology of place. Criminology, 53, 133 157. Weisburd, D., Braga, A. A., Groff, E., & Wooditch, A. (2017a). Can hot spots policing reduce crime in urban areas? An agent-based simulation. Criminology, 55, 137 173. Weisburd, D., Eck, J., Braga, A., Telep, C., Cave, B., et al. (2016). Place matters: Criminology for the 21st century. New York: Cambridge University Press. Weisburd, D., Farrington, D. P., & Gill, C. (2017b). What works in crime prevention and rehabilitation: An assessment of systematic reviews. Criminology & Public Policy, 16, 415–449. Weisburd, D., & Green, L. (1995). Policing drug hot spots: The Jersey City DMA experiment. Justice Quarterly, 12, 711–736.

Weisburd, D., Groff, E. R., Jones, G., Cave, B., Amendola, K. L., Yang, S., & Emison, R. F. (2015a). The Dallas patrol management experiment: can AVL technologies be used to harness unallocated patrol time for crime prevention? Journal of Experimental Criminology, 11, 367–391.

Weisburd, D., Groff, E., & Yang, S. (2012a). The criminology of place: Street segments and our understanding of the crime problem. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Weisburd, D., Hinkle, J. C., Famega, C., & Ready, J. (2012b). Legitimacy, fear and collective efficacy in crime hot spots: Assessing the impacts of broken windows policing strategies on citizen attitudes. Washington, DC: National Institute of Justice.

Weisburd, D., Wyckoff, L., Ready, J., Eck, J., Hinkle, J., & Gajewski, F. (2006). Does crime just move around the corner? A controlled study of spatial displacement and diffusion of crime control benefits. Criminology, 44, 549–592.

Weisburd, D., Lum, C., & Petrosino, A. (2001). Does research design affect study outcomes in criminal justice? The Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science, 578, 50–70.

Weisburd, D., & Majimundar, M. K. (Eds.). (2018). Proactive policing: Effects on crime and communities. Committee on Proactive Policing: Effects on Crime, Communities, and Civil Liberties. Washington, DC: The National Academies Press.

Weisburd, D., Mastrofski, S., McNally, A. M., Greenspan, R., & Willis, J. (2003). Reforming to preserve:

Compstat and strategic problem solving in American policing. Criminology & Public Policy, 2, 421–456. Weisburd, D., & Telep, C. W. (2014). Hot spots policing: What we know and what we need to know. Journal

of Contemporary Criminal Justice, 30, 200 220. Weisburd, D., Telep, C. W., & Braga, A. A. (2015b). The importance of place in policing: Empirical evidence and policy recommendations. Stockholm, Sweden: Brå.

Welsh, B., Peel, M., Farrington, D., Elffers, H., & Braga, A. (2011). Research design influence on study outcomes in crime and justice: A partial replication with public area surveillance. Journal of Experimental Criminology, 7, 183–198.

Wheeler, A. P., & Phillips, S. W. (2017). A quasi-experimental evaluation using roadblocks and automatic license plate readers to reduce crime in Buffalo, NY. Security Journal, 1–18 [available online]. Williams, S. A. (2015). Do visits or time spent in hot spots patrol matter most? A randomized control trial in the West Midlands Police. Cambridge: Fitzwilliam College. Wilson, D. B. (2001). Meta-analytic methods for criminology. The Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science, 578, 71–89. Wilson, D. B. (2009). Missing a critical piece of the pie: Simple document search strategies inadequate for systematic reviews. Journal of Experimental Criminology, 5, 249 440.

Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

Anthony A. Braga is a distinguished Professor and Director of the School of Criminology and Criminal Justice at Northeastern University.

Brandon S. Turchan is a Research Fellow in the School of Criminology and Criminal Justice at Northeastern University and a Ph.D. student in the School of Criminal Justice at Rutgers University.

Andrew V. Papachristos is Professor of Sociology and Director of the Northwestern Neighborhood and Network Initiative at Northwestern University.

David M. Hureau is an Assistant Professor in the School of Criminal Justice at the State University of New York, Albany.

