Tregle et al. Crime Science            (2025) 14:3 

https://doi.org/10.1186/s40163-025-00247-9

Crime Science

RESEARCH Open Access

More than meets the eye: examining the  impact of hot spots policing on the reduction  of city-wide crime

Brandon Tregle1* , Michael R. Smith1, Chantal Fahmy1 and Rob Tillyer1

Abstract

Hot spots policing is an effective, evidence-based strategy that reduces violent crime within small geographic  units, or “hot spots,” in urban areas. A strong body of research demonstrates that these hot spots disproportionately  contribute to cities’ overall crime rates. However, the existing literature has yet to answer a critical question: Can  the localized crime reductions achieved through hot spots policing make a significant enough contribution to  lower overall crime rates across an entire city? To address this gap, we examined seven years of violent crime data  from three major Texas cities. One city underwent a two-year targeted hot spots policing intervention, while the  other two cities served as counter-factual, similarly situated jurisdictions. We used interrupted time series analysis  (ITSA) to examine longitudinal crime patterns in all three cities. The findings indicate that, compared to the control  cities, the treatment city experienced a significant and substantial reduction in overall violent crime at the point  of intervention. This decrease suggests that the hot spots intervention directly contributed to city-wide crime  reduction, extending its impact beyond the designated hot spots.

Introduction

After a roughly twenty-five-year downward trend in violent crime, recent evidence indicates that violent crime  has leveled, and for some specific crimes (e.g., murder),  the trend has begun to reverse in many American cities  (FBI  Uniform  Crime  Reporting  Program,  2022).  Given  the seriousness of such offenses, many jurisdictions marshalled efforts to address the increasing levels of violent  crime.  Reducing  the  level  of  violent  crime  across  large  metropolitan  areas  is  a  significant  undertaking  requiring  substantial  commitment,  expertise,  and  resources.  Ideally,  such  efforts  should  be  based  on  empirical  evidence to maximize effectiveness.

To date, the most effective strategy for tackling violent  crime in the short term is a hot spots policing strategy  targeting micro places that disproportionately contribute  to overall violent crime in a jurisdiction. Built on roughly  thirty years of empirical evidence, this micro-place strategy  deploys  policing  resources  to  specific  locations  for  the purpose of interrupting and deterring violent crime.  This  approach  is  grounded  in  the  principles  of  routine  activity theory and aligns with the law of crime concentration (Weisburd, 2015).

While  hot  spots  policing  is  a  proven,  effective  strategy for local crime problems, it is unclear whether this  approach is effective at addressing city-wide crime patterns.  Indeed,  the  application  of  a  strategy  at  a  small  spatial  scale  should  not  necessarily  be  expected  to  impact crime patterns at the city level, particularly since  resource  constraints  likely  limit  the  number  of  micro  locations at which the strategy (i.e., hot spots policing)  can be deployed across a city. This consideration is offset, however, by the crucial fact that effective hot spots  deployment  is  strategically  executed  in  areas  that  disproportionately  experience  violent  crime  incidents.  As  a result, it is reasonable to expect that success in reducing crime at these ‘outlier’ micro locations may exert a  noticeable effect on city-wide crime. While some theoretical  perspectives  suggest  that  crime  reductions  in  hot spots could lead to broader crime control, this issue  remains an open empirical question. Weisburd and colleagues  (2017)  explored  this  issue  using  agent-based  modeling and found that, under certain conditions, crime  reductions  in  hot  spots  could  scale  up  to  larger  geographic areas. However, relatively few studies have tested  this proposition using real-world crime data. Ultimately,  the effectiveness of hot spots policing in reducing citywide  violent  crime  levels  is  an  empirical  question  and  represents the central research question addressed in the  current study.

*Correspondence:

Brandon Tregle

brandon.tregle@utsa.edu

1Department of Criminology and Criminal Justice, The University of Texas  at San Antonio, San Antonio, TX, USA

©  The  Author(s)  2025.  Open  Access    This  article  is  licensed  under  a  Creative  Commons  Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives  4.0  International License, which permits any non-commercial use, sharing, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you  give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if you modified the  licensed material. You do not have permission under this licence to share adapted material derived from this article or parts of it. The images or  other third party material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the  material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or  exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit  h t t p : / / c r e a t i   v e c o m m o n s . o r g / l i c e n s e s / b y - n c - n d / 4 . 0 /.

A  substantial  body  of  evidence  has  emerged  over  the  last  three  decades  demonstrating  that  most  violent  crime occurs within a relatively small number of microgeographic areas (Sherman et al., 1989; Weisburd et al.,  2004).  The  historical  background  of  this  analysis  has  been on meso-geographic units, such as neighborhoods  and  census  block  groups  (Braga  et  al.,  2014;  Sherman  et  al.,  1989).  More  recently,  however,  findings  suggest  smaller geographic areas are more robust for understanding crime patterns, with approximately 50% or more of  crime occurring within 2–6% of street segments in larger  jurisdictions (Braga et al., 2017; Weisburd, 2015). These  micro places, consisting of single addresses, street segments, or other small geographic areas, are referred to  as hot spots. The term hot spot is meant to represent the  idea that these micro places are considered ‘hot’ due to  their elevated rates of crime incidents and that crime is  frequent and highly predictable within them (Sherman,  1995).  Sherman  and  Weisburd  (1995)  argued  that  hot  spots must be small enough units such that the line of  sight from one side of the hot spot to the other is uninterrupted. This body of research has culminated in the  empirical conclusion that a small number of micro units  produce  the  biggest  share  of  crime  problems  in  urban  areas.  This  observation  “has  become  a  criminological  axiom”  (Braga  et  al.,  2017,  p.  421)  or  more  commonly  known  as  the  law  of  crime  concentration  (Weisburd,  2015).

Place-based criminologists also have shown that these  problematic  locations  often  have  social  and  environmental  features  that  invite  criminal  opportunities  and  facilitate  offending.  For  example,  areas  that  include  shopping centers, apartment buildings, and convenience  stores where many inhabitants live, work, and enjoy leisure activities, tend to exhibit the hallmarks of hot spots  (Koper  et  al.,  2015;  Sherman  et  al.,  1989).  Moreover,  hot spots tend to be classified as areas with high levels  of social disorganization and physical disorder and low  levels of collective efficacy, thereby creating prime conditions for crime to flourish (Weisburd et al., 2020).

The current study tests the effectiveness of hot spots  policing on a macro scale to assess whether it represents  a viable tool for reducing violent crime both within targeted areas and more broadly across an entire city. Using  seven years of data from three cities, we track and analyze  violent  crime  trends  to  assess  whether  one  city’s  introduction of a hot spots policing strategy in areas disproportionately responsible for violent crime was associated with an overall reduction in violent crime city-wide  compared to neighboring cities that did not implement  the  strategy.  In  other  words,  we  investigate  whether  reducing  crime  in  these  small,  high-crime  areas  had  a  large  enough  impact  to  lower  the  city’s  overall,  streetlevel violent crime rate. Our results demonstrate that the  treatment  city  experienced  a  larger  decrease  in  violent  crime,  relative  to  the  two  nearby  control  cities,  during  two treatment years compared with the five years prior.

Crime  in  hot  spots  also  tends  to  be  stable  over  time  (Walter,  Tillyer,  M.,  &  Acolin,  2023;  Weisburd  et  al.,  2012). The stability of crime in hot spots motivates the  theoretical  basis  behind  prevention  strategies  aimed  at  places. Particular micro locations experience higher levels of violent crime due to the confluence of motivated  offenders,  suitable  targets,  and  a  lack  of  guardianship.  This patterning allows for interventions, such as hot spot  policing,  to  interrupt  these  activities  if  crime  prevention  resources  are  deployed  strategically  (i.e.,  spatially  and temporally) with a specific directive for action. As a  result, hot spots policing operates as a strategy to leverage  limited  police  resources  against  these  high-crime  locations (Sherman & Weisburd, 1995).

Hot spots policing and crime concentration

Hot spots policing can take a variety of forms including  enhanced  police  presence  at  specific  locations  through  foot and/or vehicle patrols to increase the risk of apprehension  for  would-be  criminals  and  through  general  deterrence  (Braga  et  al.,  2014).  Other  operationalizations  include  offender-focused  apprehension  programs,  camera  monitoring  with  directed  patrol,  drug  enforcement  operations,  and  problem-oriented  policing  strategies (Braga et al., 2019; Groff et al., 2015; Rosenfeld et  al., 2014; Weisburd & Eck, 2004). In the current context,  two different hot spots treatments were applied to communicate the presence of law enforcement, deter criminal activity, and interrupt the necessary elements of the  crime triangle (discussed in more detail below).

A common question surrounding hot spots policing is  whether it contributes to over-policing in already disadvantaged communities. A recent study examining officer  behavior in hot spots found that officers did not self-initiate more enforcement actions, arrests, or traffic stops in  treated areas using a deterrence-based approach (Tregle  et al., 2025). The results suggests that police departments  can reduce crime in hot spots without using aggressive  enforcement  measures.  Small,  statistically  significant  increases  in  enforcement  actions  were  observed  in  hot  spots  treated  with  offender-focused  strategies;  however, increases in officer activity, arrests, and stops were  expected given the nature of the treatments.

The National Institute of Justice’s Crime Solutions website  evaluates  programs  and  practices  as  either  “effective1”, “promising2”, or “no effects” based on standardized  reviews of meta-analyses and other rigorous evaluations.  Crime  Solutions  rated  the  practice  of  hot  spots  policing as “effective for reducing overall crime” and “promising  for  reducing  violent,  property,  public  order,  and  drug and alcohol offenses” (National Institute of Justice,  2013). Notably, the comprehensive evidence can be characterized by three key findings: (1) the concentration of  crime; (2) crime reduction; and (3) minimal displacement  of crime. First, a significant portion of violent crime is  concentrated in small areas, such as blocks or street corners. Diluting police officers and resources across larger  spatial  areas  reduces  precision  and  may,  paradoxically,  increase citizens’ fear of crime by expanding police presence  in  oft-strained  communities  (Hinkle  &  Weisburd,  2008;  Kochel,  2011).  Second,  police  can  efficiently  and  effectively reduce crime in targeted hot spots by focusing resources (e.g., patrol officers) in those spaces. Third,  most hot spots policing studies find that crime does not  geographically displace crime nearby. Most studies find  minimal  to  no  displacement  of  crime  to  the  immediate areas surrounding the treated units (Weisburd et al.,  2006). In fact, nearby places that were not included as the  primary  focus  of  crime  prevention  efforts  may  actually  experience a diffusion of crime control benefits (Smith et  al., 2024). When this occurs, it likely has the additional  advantage  of  promoting  informal  social  control  and  increasing positive perceptions of law enforcement.

Recently, Braga et al. (2019) conducted a meta-analysis  and updated a previous Campbell Collaboration systematic review including 65 studies of the effects of hot spots  policing on crime. All included evaluations were randomized controlled trials—a gold standard for research—or  used  robust  quasi  experimental  designs.  The  evidence  was clear as nearly 80% of the eligible studies reported  significant  crime  control  gains  and  approximately  78%  reported  effect  sizes  that  favored  the  treatment  conditions  over  the  control  conditions.  Furthermore,  the  meta-analysis of crime displacement versus diffusion of  benefits  effects  suggested  a  small,  but  statistically  significant overall diffusion of crime (Braga et al., 2019). In  line with these findings, Smith et al. (2024) recently substantiated the effectiveness of using a hot spots policing  strategy to reduce crime in Dallas, Texas. Over the oneyear period under analysis, the jurisdiction experienced  a roughly 11% reduction in violent crime incidents in the  330 x 330 feet grids treated in comparison to the rest of  the city.

Effectiveness of hot spots policing

Given the years of research on the effectiveness of hot  spots policing, many scholars have argued if police officers focus their attention and resources on these persistently high-crime areas, many crime problems can and  will be reduced (Sherman & Weisburd, 1995). Indeed, to  claim that hot spots policing is effective is “an established  fact based on strong experimental and quasi-experimental evidence” (Weisburd & Telep, 2014, p. 202). The practical appeal is clear: directing police departments’ limited  resources on targeted areas conserves money, time, and  effort, while also enhancing public safety. Moreover, the  implication  for  theoretical  development  is  apparent  as  well. With more amassed evidence for the generalizability of hot spots policing (Weisburd, 2015), or rather the  approach to understanding micro spatial areas of crime  as units of analysis, we can much better anticipate and  control overall patterns of crime in a jurisdiction.

Broadly, the evidence regarding the law of crime concentration has been demonstrated across variously sized  jurisdictions in the United States in cities such as Seattle,  Minneapolis,  Chicago,  and  Boston  (Braga  et  al.,  2010;  Schnell et al., 2017; Sherman et al., 1989; Weisburd et al.,  2004), as well as in other countries such as Canada, England, Sweden, and India (Andresen et al., 2017; Marklund  & Merenius, 2014; Mazeika & Kumar, 2017; Nelson et al.,  2001).  Thus,  concentrating  crime  prevention  resources  in hot spots is compelling for both short- and long-term  improvements (Andresen & Malleson, 2011; Braga et al.,  2017; Weisburd et al., 2004), and it should be expected to  impact levels of violent crime in various contexts.

Despite evidence of the efficacy of hot spots policing, as  with any crime control strategy presented by law enforcement, it is not without criticism. Most notably, critics of  hot spots policing argue that it may have the unintended  outcome of being detrimental to the already uneasy trust  in the police by community members (Kochel, 2011), particularly in recent years. However, in terms of the legitimacy of the police or general perceptions of the police’s  role in society (Weisburd & Telep, 2014), much empirical work has found negligible negative impacts from residents on perceptions of local crime and disorder, public  safety, and even overall satisfaction with the police (e.g.,  Ratcliffe et al., 2015).

1  Programs rated as effective have shown strong evidence that the intended  outcome will be achieved; in this case, a reduction of crime.

2  Programs rated as promising have shown that, on average, there is some  evidence that the intended outcome will be achieved, but this relies partially  on program fidelity.

Although there is extensive literature pointing to the efficacy of hot spots policing in reducing crime, it is unclear  whether focusing hot spots policing strategies in a limited number of micro areas can lower crime on the macro  level  throughout  a  major  city.  Koper  and  colleagues  (2021)  (discussed  further  below)  found  such  an  effect,  but their study is one of the few to squarely address this  important question, and it was limited to a single small  city. While implementing interventions in a small number of chronic hot spots should be expected to substantively impact crime levels at those specific locations, the  broader  effects  of  the  strategy  are  less  predictable.  At  least  two  processes  may  be  at  work  if  hot  spots  policing are shown to have crime reduction benefits at scale.  First, city-level effects experienced from a crime reduction strategy applied at a micro level could be achieved  because  high-crime  locations  receiving  treatment  may  disproportionately contribute to broader crime patterns.  As  a  result,  reductions  in  these  outlier  locations  may  reduce  crime  at  the  city  level  because  collectively  they  may represent a large enough proportion of total crime  in a city that significant crime reductions in them may  reduce overall crime counts city-wide. Alternatively, the  effects of a hot spots strategy may not only impact the  treated locations, but through a diffusion of benefits process, wider crime reduction effects may be experienced  in neighboring locations, which, in turn, may lower crime  counts  city-wide.  In  other  words,  the  locations  immediately  surrounding  treated  hot  spots  may  experience  the benefits of treatments due to their proximity to the  treated area, despite not having been treated themselves.  Finally,  it  is  also  possible  that  both  processes  operate  simultaneously and contribute to a reduction in violent  crime  at  the  city  level.  Ultimately,  these  are  empirical  questions addressed by the current study, which examines  the  extent  to  which  hot  spots  policing  may  have  reduced violent crime incidents across the city of Dallas.

Apart from this criticism, Koper and colleagues (2021)  argued  that  the  greatest  challenge  remaining  in  the  empirical investigation and practice of hot spots policing  is  demonstrating  “whether  implementing  a  more  widespread,  systematic,  and  sustained  preventive  emphasis  on hot spots in everyday police operations can produce  large-scale aggregated reductions in crime for extended  periods” (p. 1111). Similarly, Weisburd and Telep (2014)  acknowledge  that  the  reduction  of  crime  in  an  entire  jurisdiction is perhaps the most important unanswered  question  in  the  study  of  hot  spots  policing.  For  the  complete set of benefits of a hot spots strategy to reach  impactful levels at a broader level, which had only been  implied by theory and research at this point, the strategy  must be capable of reducing crime across an entire jurisdiction, or what Sherman et al. (2014) referred to as “scaling up”.

Background

In  May  of  2021,  the  Dallas  Police  Department  (DPD)  implemented a city-wide, three-part violent crime reduction plan. The initial phase of this plan involved the development and deployment of a hot spots policing strategy  across selected high-crime locations throughout the city.3 Locations selected to receive treatment experienced disproportionately high levels of violent crime compared to  the rest of the city. Targeted locations then received the  hot spots treatment for between 60 and 90 days.4 At the  conclusion  of  each  treatment  period,  treated  locations  were  analyzed  for  changes  in  violent  crime  incidents.  Additionally,  neighboring  catchment  areas  measuring  1,000 feet around all hot spots were assessed for evidence  of displacement or diffusion of benefits (see Smith et al.,  2022 for a summary of initial results).

The current study

To identify hot spots, a geographic grid network was  overlaid across the entire city, which created spatial units  (hereafter referred to as grids) measuring 330 × 330 feet,  or  approximately  the  length  of  a  football  field  on  each  side. This process produced slightly more than 100,000  grids across the city to which violent crime incidents were  mapped. This approach allowed for the precise, systematic identification of small violent crime hot spots. The  targeted grids were selected by analyzing violent crime  incidents  across  all  grids  in  the  previous  two  months,  as well as one year prior, to each treatment period. Hot  spot treatment recommendations were weighted toward  elevated levels of violent crime in the most recent 60-day  period, with consideration for longer-term crime trends  as well. Temporal analyses were then used to determine  the  hours  and  days  of  the  week  during  which  violent  crime most often occurred in or immediately surrounding the hot spot grids, and those times and days of the  week were recommended for treatment. Each treatment  cycle  consisted  of  50–60  grids.  Prior  to  the  conclusion  of each treatment period, a new set of treatment locations were identified, and a new cycle of treatment was  initiated at the conclusion of the previous cycle. In total,  313  unique  grids  were  treated  between  May  2021  and  December 2023.

3  The hot spots strategy was the only operational phase for the entire duration  of  this  study.  Additionally,  Phase  2  targeted  only  two  of  the  treated  areas during the study period and did not materially contribute to the crime  reduction effects documented below.

4  Treatment periods in the first year of the strategy were 90 days long but  subsequently were shortened to 60 days when analyses revealed that most  crime reduction benefits occurred in the first 60 days of treatment.

Hot spots treatments consisted of two types of strategies: high visibility (HV) and offender focused (OF). HV  treatments  focused  on  visual  deterrence.  Officers  were  deployed to the hot spots, at the recommended hours,  and instructed to park their patrol cars in visual proximity of the targeted grids. Officers initially remained inside  their cars for 15 min with all emergency lights activated.  Later,  they  were  instructed  to  exit  their  vehicles,  leaving all emergency lights illuminated, and engage in foot  patrol within the targeted grids. OF treatments consisted  of  proactive  investigative  and  enforcement  activities  by  specialized crime response teams (CRTs) that used crime  intelligence  and  surveillance  to  target  high-risk  offenders who lived in or frequented the targeted grids.5 During  each treatment period, a roughly equal number of recommended grids were treated with each strategy. Within  city comparisons demonstrated that the hot spots treatments  lowered  violent  crime  in  the  targeted  hot  spots  by roughly 11% (Smith et al., 2023) with no evidence of  spatial  displacement.  Conversely,  the  results  showed  that  there  was  a  reduction  of  3.2%  in  violent  crime  in  untreated adjacent areas in the study’s first year, (Smith  et al., 2022) and 4.9% in the study’s second year (Smith et  al., 2023). Compared to all other untreated grids within  the  city,  a  difference  in  differences  model  showed  that  crime fell a modest, but statistically significant amount  (0.04%) in catchment areas (Smith et al., 2022). Together,  these results suggest that there was a diffusion of benefits  during the current study period.

Importantly, DPD consistently maintained a high rate  of fidelity to the treatment plan during the study’s period.  For our purposes, fidelity was defined as the number of  times an officer was present in the correct grid, within  the correct hour, for at least 15 min. Prior research has  found  that  15  min  is  the  point  at  which  officer  presence  achieves  peak  effectiveness  (Koper,  1995;  Telep  et  al.,  2014).  Fidelity  was  tracked  using  computer-aided  dispatch  (CAD)  data.  While  we  are  aware  of  limitations surrounding CAD data as an accurate measure of  police activity (Lum et al., 2020), the large crime reductions seen in treatment areas suggest that officers were in  fact present and performing the hot spots treatments as  intended. Throughout the eight treatment periods, fidelity ranged from 62%, in the first period, to a high of 89%.  On average, DPD achieved a fidelity rate of roughly 80%  during this study.

Data

Data for the current study were drawn from three Texas  cities: Dallas, Arlington, and Fort Worth6. Dallas implemented  its  violent  crime  reduction  plan  in  May  2021  in  response  to  increasing  violent  crime  and  a  change  in  departmental  strategy  under  newly  appointed  Chief  Eddie  García  (Dallas  Police  Department,  2020).  Fort  Worth  and  Arlington,  which  did  not  implement  comparable  interventions  during  this  period,  serve  as  useful  comparison  cities  to  assess  the  independent  effect  of  the  Dallas  strategy.  Fort  Worth  and  Arlington  were  chosen as the counterfactual cities because they are the  next  two  largest  cities  in  the  Dallas  metroplex.  While  they differ somewhat in size and crime rates from Dallas (see Table 1), their racial and ethnic compositions are  similar to Dallas. Most important for the purposes of our  research  design,  they  are  geographically  proximate  to  Dallas—Arlington sits to the west of Dallas between Dallas and Fort Worth—and all three are located within the  Dallas-Fort  Worth  metropolitan  area.  As  a  result,  they  would have been influenced by the same state-level policies  and  similar  criminogenic  conditions,  including  the  impact of the COVID-19 pandemic.

Preliminary  analyses  demonstrated  that  in  the  year  prior  to  the  crime  plan’s  implementation,  fewer  than  6,000 of Dallas’s 101,103 grids accounted for all violent  crime  in  the  city  of  Dallas.  Additionally,  at  any  given  time, 50 to 60 grids accounted for 8–10% of the total violent crime in Dallas. These high-crime grids rotated every  60 days, meaning that different grids were responsible for  a large proportion of crime during different months. As  expected,  the  occurrence  of  violent  crime  incidents  in  Dallas aligned with the law of crime concentration experienced by many other jurisdictions. This concentration  of violent crime provided a leverage point that allowed  DPD to focus its resources on lowering crime in these  micro places.

Thus, all murder, aggravated assault, and robbery incidents (i.e., violent street crime) occurring in these cities  between May 2016 and April 2023 were included in the  analysis. Since Dallas’ intervention was not designed to  address  family  violence,  non-family  related  aggravated  assaults  were  removed  from  the  Dallas  and  Arlington  analyses. The data provided by Fort Worth did not allow  for differentiation between family and non-family related  incidents; as a result, it is the only city that includes family-related aggravated assaults. All reported offenses were  aggregated to the incident level to account for the crime  prevention strategy’s focus on reducing crime incidents  at hot spots, although crime incident and victim counts  track each other closely in Dallas.

5   Many  of  the  offenders  targeted  by  the  CRTs  had  pre-existing  warrants  on file. The CRTs made efforts to find and arrest these individuals and also  developed investigative leads on others engaged in high-risk criminal activities  linked  to  violence  such  as  drug  dealing,  carrying  illegal  weapons,  or  street robberies.

6  Due to legal restrictions, the data are not publicly available. Data can be  obtained via public records request to the relevant city government. Additional information regarding the data or its methodology can be made available upon request to the corresponding author, pending approval from the  city.

|Table 1 City characteristics|Table 1 City characteristics|Table 1 City characteristics|Table 1 City characteristics|
|---|---|---|---|
| |Population|Demographics|Violent Crime Rate|
|Dallas|1.29 million|White: 28%<br><br>Hispanic/Latino: 42%<br><br>Black: 23%<br><br>Other/mixed race: 7%|845 / 100,00 residents|
|Arlington|392,800|White: 35%<br><br>Hispanic/Latino: 31%<br><br>Black: 22%<br><br>Other/mixed race: 12%|445 / 100,00 residents|
|Fort Worth|935,510|White: 37%<br><br>Hispanic/Latino: 35%<br><br>Black: 19%<br><br>Other/mixed race: 9%|769 / 100,00 residents|


The primary analytic technique used to assess whether  Dallas  experienced  a  change  in  city-wide  violent  crime  levels  associated  with  the  introduction  of  its  violent  crime  reduction  plan  was  an  interrupted  time  series  analysis (ITSA). Specifically, we used time series regression  with  Newey-West  corrections  for  autocorrelation  (Newey  &  West,  1987).  ITSA  is  well  suited  for  tracking and comparing data before and after treatment over  long periods of time (Campbell & Stanley, 1986; Cook,  Campbell,  &  Shaddish,  2002).  Our  analysis  allows  for  examination of both immediate and longer-term effects  of the intervention. For the current study, ITSA was used  to compare the monthly counts of violent crime in Dallas prior to treatment with the monthly counts of violent  crime  after  treatment  began.  Separate  ITSA  analyses  for  each  city  were  conducted  to  evaluate  the  effect  of  treatment in Dallas versus the same periods in the two  cities that did not receive hot spots treatments as part of  a city-wide violence reduction plan. Thus, monthly violent  crime  counts  in  the  pre-intervention  period,  from  May  2016  to  April  2021,  were  compared  with  counts  from  the  post  intervention  period,  from  May  2021  to  April 2023. ITSA was conducted in the two comparison  cities that did not receive treatment to create counterfactuals using similarly situated jurisdictions. This approach  allowed  us  to  isolate  the  effects  of  treatment  in  Dallas  (Linden & Adams, 2011).

While a total of 84 months (i.e., 7 years) of data were  available,  the  month  of  February  2021  was  excluded  because  all  three  cities  experienced  lower  than  normal  crime counts during that month due to extreme weather  conditions.7  This  created  a  longitudinal  period  of  83  months. Data were transformed to create a unique count  of violent crime in each city by month. Hot spots treatments, as part of their city-wide violent crime reduction  plan,  began  in  Dallas  in  May  of  2021  (i.e.,  Month  59).  There is no available evidence to suggest the cities of Fort  Worth and Arlington were involved in a comparable citywide, violent crime reduction program during this sevenyear period.

To  ensure  reliability  of  the  analysis,  an  Augmented  Dickey-Fuller (ADF) test for stationarity on the dataset  was estimated. Autocorrelation was also examined using  the Breusch-Godfrey Serial Correlation LM Test. These  tests are necessary when performing ITSA to determine  whether the data were influenced by non-stationarity or  correlation of variables with themselves (Box & Jenkins,  1976;  Breusch,  1978;  Dickey  &  Fuller,  1979;  Hamilton,  2020; Wooldridge, 2010). The ADF test indicated that the  data were stationary at the 0.05 significance level.8 However, we detected the presence of autocorrelation in the  data  (p = 0.000).  To  address  this  issue,  all  models  were  estimated using the ‘newey’ command in Stata to adjust  the model’s standard errors and mitigate the impact of  autocorrelation (Newey & West, 1987).

Analytic strategy

Initially, longitudinal trends in violent crime from May  2016  to  April  2023  in  each  city  were  graphed.  Understanding broader crime trends overtime is essential when  evaluating the impact of policing strategies (Eck & Maguire, 2000; Weisburd et al., 2006). This approach provided  a global context for understanding the overall trends in  violent crime for each city, independent of the hot spots  intervention. Considering these longer trends provided a  more complete picture of the crime patterns in each city  while contextualizing the findings from the ITSA models.

7  Much of Texas experienced a severe winter storm in February 2021. The  state  experienced  wide-spread  power  outages,  water  supply  disruptions,  hazardous travel conditions, and dozens of fatalities due to injuries related  to cold exposure. In February 2021, there were 453 violent crime incidents  in Dallas compared to a monthly average of 642 in the 12 months prior.  There were 128 incidents in Arlington compared to a monthly average of  181 in the 12 months prior. Fort Worth experienced 181 incidents compared  to a monthly average of 303 in the 12 months prior.

As  additional  checks  on  our  ITSA  results,  we  conducted a series of robustness checks. First, we quantified  the  impact  of  the  hot  spots  strategy  by  calculating  monthly averages of violent crime in Dallas for the two  years before treatment began (May 2019 to April 2021)  and the two years during treatment (May 2021 to April  2023). We segmented the analysis across three groups of  grids: all grids in the city, grids that never received treatment, and grids that received treatment in one or more  periods. In comparing the pre-treatment and treatment  period  averages,  we  calculated  the  percent  change  in  violent crime for each group of grids. This analysis was  helpful in understanding the hot spots strategy’s overall  impact on crime in Dallas and how these different groups  of grids were affected independently and relative to each  other.

8  Dallas: p = 0.252; Arlington: p = 0.054; Fort Worth: p = 0.205.

To account for potential confounding factors, we incorporated seasonal controls and a COVID-19 period indicator into the ITSA model. The seasonal indicators (Spring,  Summer, and Fall, with Winter as the reference category)  were included to control for potential seasonal fluctuations in violent crime. Additionally, we added a COVID  period  indicator  to  account  for  public  health  restrictions in Dallas resulting from the implementation of the  shelter-in-place  order  in  March  2020  (Dallas  County,  2020) through December 2020. Although the Governor  of Texas lifted the statewide shelter-in-place order at the  end of April 2020 (Tate, 2020), reports indicated that only  about one-third of Dallas residents had returned to inperson work by October 2020 (Jenkins, 2020). Therefore,  we  accounted  for  a  gradual  transition  through  the  end  of  2020.  The  results,  presented  in  Appendix  Table  A1,  indicate that the intervention point and post-treatment  trend remained significant. The COVID indicator did not  show detectable effects. The seasonal controls indicated  a significant decrease in crime during the Fall months.  There were no significant seasonal effects for Spring or  Summer. These results further reinforce our findings and  provide additional evidence that the crime reduction in  Dallas is attributable to the intervention rather than seasonal patterns or pandemic-related disruptions.

Finally, we further tested the level and trend of violent  crime  in  Dallas  at  pseudo  intervention  points  (Linden,  2015). These tests serve as another robustness check and  provide more information on crime trends prior to the  start of the intervention. We estimated models with placebo dates in January 2018, January 2019, January 2020,  and May 2020. The change at the point of “intervention”  was not statistically significant for any of the models. That  said, Fig. 1 does suggest that violent crime was already on  a downward trajectory before the actual intervention in  May  2021.  Still,  even  if  pre-existing  trends  contributed  to the overall decline in violent crime during the study  period, the intervention itself accelerated and reinforced  this  decline  beyond  what  would  have  been  expected  based solely on the underlying trend. The results of the  pseudo intervention are presented in Appendix Table A2.

Results

Table 1 provides population, racial and ethnic composition, and violent crime data for all three cities. All information provided is based on population estimates from  the  2021  U.S.  Census  and  the  Uniform  Crime  Report  (UCR) (Federal Bureau of Investigation, 2021; U.S. Census Bureau, 2021). Dallas’ population was approximately  violent  crime  incidents  per  100,000  residents  in  2021.  1.29  million,  and  the  city  experienced  roughly  845  Fort Worth’s population was nearly one million residents,  and the city experienced approximately 770 incidents per  100,000 during the same year. Arlington was the smallest  city  in  the  study  with  approximately  392,800  residents,  and  it  also  had  the  lowest  violent  crime  rate  with  445  incidents per 100,000.

|Table 2 Summary of monthly violent crime counts (May 2016 – April 2023)|Table 2 Summary of monthly violent crime counts (May 2016 – April 2023)|Table 2 Summary of monthly violent crime counts (May 2016 – April 2023)|Table 2 Summary of monthly violent crime counts (May 2016 – April 2023)|Table 2 Summary of monthly violent crime counts (May 2016 – April 2023)|Table 2 Summary of monthly violent crime counts (May 2016 – April 2023)|Table 2 Summary of monthly violent crime counts (May 2016 – April 2023)|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
| |Mean|Std. Dev.|Min - Max|Pre-Treatment (N = 59)|Post-Treatment (N = 24)|% Change|
|Dallas|604.80|78.34|393–790|630.81|540.83|-14.26%|
|Arlington|170.30|24.58|113–217|161.85|191.08|18.06%|
|Fort Worth|326.99|49.45|229–487|331.76|315.25|-4.98%|
|Note. N = 83; Excludes February 2021|Note. N = 83; Excludes February 2021|Note. N = 83; Excludes February 2021|Note. N = 83; Excludes February 2021|Note. N = 83; Excludes February 2021|Note. N = 83; Excludes February 2021|Note. N = 83; Excludes February 2021|


Table  2  provides  the  average  monthly  violent  crime  counts for each city between May 2016 and April 2023.  Dallas averaged 605 violent crime incidents per month  compared  with  170  and  327  in  Arlington  and  Fort  Worth,  respectively.  During  the  pre-treatment  period  (May 2016-April 2021), Dallas experienced, on average,  631 violent crime incidents per month, but that average  dipped  to  541  per  month  post-treatment.  This  represents a 14% reduction in average monthly violent crime  incidents after the introduction of the city-wide violent  crime reduction plan operationalized with the hot spots  strategy  detailed  above.  Conversely,  Fort  Worth  saw  a  marginal  reduction  post-May  2021  of  5%  compared  to  the  average  monthly  count  in  the  previous  five  years.  Arlington  experienced  a  noticeable  increase  of  18%  in  average violent crime incidents after May 2021 compared  to the previous five years.

Figures 2, 3 and 4 visually demonstrate the seven-year  trends in each city with a red vertical line to indicate the  start of treatment in Dallas. Of note, the three cities demonstrated different violent crime trends in the five-year  period prior to May 2021. Dallas experienced an increase  in monthly violent crime activity with the highest levels  of activity occurring in 2019 and 2020 (see Fig. 2). Arlington also experienced an increase in violent crime before  the Dallas intervention, which was more pronounced and  consistent than in Dallas (see Fig. 3). Finally, Fort Worth  experienced a noticeable reduction in violent crime incidents from 2016 to 2021 (see Fig. 4). Given these three  different  historical  trends,  it  is  important  to  evaluate  violent  crime  activity  post-May  2021  to  visually  assess  city-level changes after Dallas initiated its violent crime  reduction crime plan.

Of  note,  when  examining  only  the  post-treatment  months  (May  2021-Apr  2023),  all  three  cities  experienced a downward trend in violent crime activity as evidenced by the dotted line on the right-hand side of the  intervention line. Importantly, only Dallas experienced a  consistently lower level of violent crime post-treatment  that  began  at  the  point  of  intervention  and  continued  through  April  2023.  In  Arlington,  violent  crime  levels  spiked  in  the  summers  of  2021  and  2022  before  dropping in late 2022 and early 2023. This pattern explains the  overall downward trend line, but it was heavily influenced  by the spike in violent crime post-May 2021. Similarly in  Fort Worth, violent crime activity was as high or higher  in  Summer  2021  and  Summer  2022  compared  to  any  time going back to 2018. Recent reductions in late 2022  and  early  2023  are  clearly  driving  the  downward  trend  line. In sum, these graphs demonstrate that only Dallas  experienced a noticeable reduction in violent crime incidents immediately after the introduction of the city-wide  violent crime reduction plan in May 2021, while the two  comparison cities experienced elevated levels of violent  crime  during  the  immediate  months  after  the  violent  crime reduction plan was initiated in Dallas.

|Table 3 ITSA results for violent crime (May 2016-April 2023) in three cities|Table 3 ITSA results for violent crime (May 2016-April 2023) in three cities|Table 3 ITSA results for violent crime (May 2016-April 2023) in three cities|Table 3 ITSA results for violent crime (May 2016-April 2023) in three cities|Table 3 ITSA results for violent crime (May 2016-April 2023) in three cities|Table 3 ITSA results for violent crime (May 2016-April 2023) in three cities|Table 3 ITSA results for violent crime (May 2016-April 2023) in three cities|Table 3 ITSA results for violent crime (May 2016-April 2023) in three cities|Table 3 ITSA results for violent crime (May 2016-April 2023) in three cities|Table 3 ITSA results for violent crime (May 2016-April 2023) in three cities|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
| |Dallas|Dallas|Dallas|Arlington|Arlington|Arlington|Fort Worth|Fort Worth|Fort Worth|
| |Coeff.|SE|t|Coeff.|SE|t|Coeff.|SE|t|
|Monthly Trend|0.478|0.531|0.90|0.433*|0.211|2.06|-1.815***|0.455|-3.98|
|Intervention Point|-53.269*|26.496|-2.01|40.556***|10.812|3.75|64.536**|18.935|3.41|
|Treatment vs. Post-treatment|-4.916**|1.367|-3.60|-2.548***|0.558|-4.57|− 0.499|0.989|-0.50|
|Note. N = 83; *p < 0.05; **p < 0.01; ***p < 0.00<br><br>Monthly Trend: average change across the entire period of study<br><br>Intervention Point: the immediate impact of treatment<br><br>Treatment vs. Post-treatment: interaction term between treatment and time; compared the trend after treatment began to the pre-treatment trend|Note. N = 83; *p < 0.05; **p < 0.01; ***p < 0.00<br><br>Monthly Trend: average change across the entire period of study<br><br>Intervention Point: the immediate impact of treatment<br><br>Treatment vs. Post-treatment: interaction term between treatment and time; compared the trend after treatment began to the pre-treatment trend|Note. N = 83; *p < 0.05; **p < 0.01; ***p < 0.00<br><br>Monthly Trend: average change across the entire period of study<br><br>Intervention Point: the immediate impact of treatment<br><br>Treatment vs. Post-treatment: interaction term between treatment and time; compared the trend after treatment began to the pre-treatment trend|Note. N = 83; *p < 0.05; **p < 0.01; ***p < 0.00<br><br>Monthly Trend: average change across the entire period of study<br><br>Intervention Point: the immediate impact of treatment<br><br>Treatment vs. Post-treatment: interaction term between treatment and time; compared the trend after treatment began to the pre-treatment trend|Note. N = 83; *p < 0.05; **p < 0.01; ***p < 0.00<br><br>Monthly Trend: average change across the entire period of study<br><br>Intervention Point: the immediate impact of treatment<br><br>Treatment vs. Post-treatment: interaction term between treatment and time; compared the trend after treatment began to the pre-treatment trend|Note. N = 83; *p < 0.05; **p < 0.01; ***p < 0.00<br><br>Monthly Trend: average change across the entire period of study<br><br>Intervention Point: the immediate impact of treatment<br><br>Treatment vs. Post-treatment: interaction term between treatment and time; compared the trend after treatment began to the pre-treatment trend|Note. N = 83; *p < 0.05; **p < 0.01; ***p < 0.00<br><br>Monthly Trend: average change across the entire period of study<br><br>Intervention Point: the immediate impact of treatment<br><br>Treatment vs. Post-treatment: interaction term between treatment and time; compared the trend after treatment began to the pre-treatment trend|Note. N = 83; *p < 0.05; **p < 0.01; ***p < 0.00<br><br>Monthly Trend: average change across the entire period of study<br><br>Intervention Point: the immediate impact of treatment<br><br>Treatment vs. Post-treatment: interaction term between treatment and time; compared the trend after treatment began to the pre-treatment trend|Note. N = 83; *p < 0.05; **p < 0.01; ***p < 0.00<br><br>Monthly Trend: average change across the entire period of study<br><br>Intervention Point: the immediate impact of treatment<br><br>Treatment vs. Post-treatment: interaction term between treatment and time; compared the trend after treatment began to the pre-treatment trend|Note. N = 83; *p < 0.05; **p < 0.01; ***p < 0.00<br><br>Monthly Trend: average change across the entire period of study<br><br>Intervention Point: the immediate impact of treatment<br><br>Treatment vs. Post-treatment: interaction term between treatment and time; compared the trend after treatment began to the pre-treatment trend|


|Table 4 Dallas hot spot treatments and city-wide violent crime  (May 2019-April 2023)|Table 4 Dallas hot spot treatments and city-wide violent crime  (May 2019-April 2023)|Table 4 Dallas hot spot treatments and city-wide violent crime  (May 2019-April 2023)|Table 4 Dallas hot spot treatments and city-wide violent crime  (May 2019-April 2023)|
|---|---|---|---|
| |Pre-Treatment|Post-Treatment|% Change|
|City-wide|653.1|540.8|-20.8%|
|Treatment Grids|23.2|14.8|-56.2%|
|Non-treated Grids|376.8|480.2|21.5%|


Figure 4 depicts the overall linear trends for all three  cities. This figure is presented as a visual complement to  the detailed findings discussed above. In this figure, the  trends for Dallas, Fort Worth, and Arlington are represented by blue, green, and grey dotted lines, respectively.  The dotted red line indicates the beginning of treatment  in Dallas. Notably, the Fig. 4 scatterplot and the negative  pre-post slope coefficient for Dallas (-4.916) from Table 3 demonstrate  that  the  downward  trend  in  Dallas  steepened  after  the  intervention  and  was  largely  driven  by  the reductions seen on the right side of the intervention  line  as  confirmed  by  the  Intervention  Point  coefficient  (-53.269).  In  Fort  Worth,  violent  crime  trended  downward  in  2019  and  2020  compared  to  2016–2018;  however, the city has since experienced an uptick in violent  crime in the post-treatment period despite the negative  monthly trend coefficient (-1.815) across the entire time  series. Meanwhile, violent crime in Arlington has steadily  increased, which can be seen in the Fig. 4 scatterplot and  positive monthly trend coefficient (0.433) from Table 3.

The ITSA results are presented in Table 3. The intervention  point  results  confirm  the  visual  evidence  presented  in  Figs.  1,  2  and  3.  For  Dallas,  the  intervention  coefficient  of  -53.269  (p < 0.05)  indicates  that  the  intervention effect was significant, and there was an immediate reduction in violent crime following the introduction  of the hot spots strategy. Conversely, Arlington and Fort  Worth  experienced  statistically  significant  increases  in  violent  crime  incidents  post-May  2021  (40.556,  and  64.536, respectively). Importantly, the intervention effect  appears  strongest  immediately  after  implementation  despite  the  lowest  rate  of  fidelity  in  the  earliest  phase  (62%). These results suggest that violent crime trends in  treated places still reacted to the visible presence of officers in hot spots, despite not yet optimal levels of implementation, which may have had a deterrent effect almost  immediately.  In  other  words,  crime  suppression  efforts  and  the  visibility  of  officers  in  marked  patrol  cars  may  have  contributed  to  early  deterrence,  with  a  continued  decline as fidelity steadily improved over time.

Finally, Table 4 displays the average number of violent  crime incidents in Dallas across three groups of grids: all  grids in the city, all grids that never received treatment,  and all treated grids. These comparisons are made using  a smaller, four-year dataset. We have reduced the number of pre-treatment months to a period that is equal to  the number of treatment months for a more precise and  conservative  pre-treatment  measure.  City-wide,  violent  crime  in  Dallas  decreased  20.8%  in  the  post-treatment  period relative to the pre-treatment period. There were,  on  average,  653.1  violent  crime  incidents  per  month  from May 2019 to April 2021 compared to a post-treatment  average  of  540.8  from  May  2019  to  April  2023.  This drop reflects a city-wide crime reduction, including  both treated and untreated grids. As a reminder, fewer  than 6,000 grids account for all violent crime in Dallas.  Additionally,  many  of  the  untreated  grids  experienced  only  one  violent  crime  during  the  entire  study  period.  At the same time, violent crime decreased by 56.2% in  treated grids, decreasing from a monthly average of 23.2  before treatment to 14.8 after treatment. This decrease  reflects the crime reduction in the 313 total treated grids.  In non-treated grids, violent crime increased by 21.5%.  Monthly counts rose from an average of 376.8 pre-treatment  to  480.2  during  treatment.  Taken  together,  these  results suggest that the city-wide reduction reflects the  cumulative effect of treating a substantial proportion of  the highest-violence grids while non-treated areas saw a  rise in crime, which was more than offset by the substantial reduction in crime that occurred in hot spots following treatment.

Returning to Table 3, the coefficient for the comparison of pre- versus post-treatment slopes also was statistically significant and negative in Dallas (-4.916, p < 0.01),  indicating  that  violent  crime  trended  downward  significantly in the post-treatment period compared to the  months before the hot spots treatment began. In Arlington, there was also a statistically significant decrease in  the post-treatment violent crime trend (-2.548, p = 0.00)  compared to the pre-intervention trend, but unlike Dallas, Arlington experienced a spike in violent crime immediately after the Dallas intervention month (May 2021),  which continued through 2022 before violent crime fell  sharply in 2023. There was no change in Fort Worth’s violent crime trend in the pre-treatment period compared to  the post-treatment months.

Given the observed reduction in violent crime in Dallas  relative to counterfactual comparison cities, the findings  provide strong evidence that the Dallas hot spots strategy was the most likely causative factor in the city-wide  reduction  in  violent  crime  experienced  by  Dallas  posttreatment. To further test this conclusion, we conducted  additional analyses to examine the impact of the strategy  on crime in treated and untreated grids. The 56% reduction  in  violent  crime  within  treated  grids,  when  contrasted with the 21.5% increase observed in non-treated  grids,  provides  further  evidence  that  the  city-wide  reduction in violent crime incidents was due to the hot  spots intervention. Put another way, the interruption of  violent  crime  patterns  in  the  areas  that  disproportionately contributed to the city’s overall crime rate had a significant impact on overall crime counts, which effectively  reduced city-wide violent crime levels in Dallas.

Moreover,  without  the  intervention,  the  non-treated  grid results suggest that violent crime may have increased  in  Dallas  post-treatment,  as  it  did  initially  in  the  comparison cities, but for the hot spots intervention. It is also  possible that the rise in violent crime in untreated areas  of the city was the result of crime displacement from the  hot spots treatments. Either way, the results underscore  the strong likelihood that the Dallas hot spots intervention was responsible for a subsequent drop in city-wide  violent crime counts attributable to the intervention itself  and not to regional crime patterns or trends.

Discussion

In early summer 2021, Dallas implemented a hot spots  policing strategy that deployed officers to the city’s highest violent crime-producing grids to either sit stationary  in lighted patrol cars9 or to focus enforcement efforts on  high-risk violent offenders by specialized crime response  teams.  The  analyses  and  results  shown  above  provide  strong  evidence  that  concentrating  police  resources  in just 0.05% of the city’s land area (50–60 out 101,103  small  grids)  resulted  in  an  approximate  14%  reduction  in  violent  street  crime  incidents  city-wide.  Meanwhile,  violent  crime  in  nearby  counterfactual  cities  increased  in  the  months  following  the  Dallas  intervention.  Seasonal trends evident in the data and highlighted in the  ITSA results provide additional evidence of the impact of  the Dallas hot spots strategy on city-wide violent crime  totals. Following, the introduction of hot spots policing,  Dallas bucked seasonal crime trends evident in its own  data and experienced a significant reduction in monthly  violent crime in the summer of 2021 while crime spiked  in  the  two  comparison  cities  consistent  with  seasonal  patterns.

Our  findings  have  important  implications  for  both  researchers  and  police  executives  interested  in  implementing  evidence-based  crime  control  strategies.  Hot  spots policing has a long history of success at reducing  crime in small, targeted areas (Braga et al., 2019; National  Research Council, 2004; Weisburd & Telep, 2014). Sherman et al. (2014) and Weisburd et al. (2015, 2017) have  theorized that hot spots policing should be able to reduce  crime  in  larger  areas  or  even  city-wide  if  properly  and  sustainably  implemented.  Recently,  Koper  et  al.  (2021)  lent support to this idea when they documented reductions  in  city-wide  crime  and  disorder-related  calls  for  service  following  the  adoption  of  a  hot  spots  policing  strategy in Manhattan, KS, a city of approximately 55,000.

This  study  is  among  a  very  few  that  have  shown  an  impact of spots policing on city-wide measures of crime  and  disorder  over  time.  The  Manhattan,  KS  strategy  started in 2013 and had been ongoing for seven years at  the time the Koper et al. (2021) analysis was completed.  However, because most reported hot spots experiments  have been short-lived, the research community has been  unable  to  consistently  document  whether  hot  spots  policing can move the needle on city-wide crime counts  over months or years. This, in turn, has likely slowed the  uptake of hot spots policing as a long-term strategy to  reduce crime, particularly in big cities where sustaining  evidence-based strategies is more challenging given span  of  control  difficulties,  frequent  turnover  of  personnel,  including chiefs, and big city political challenges.

Here, we have shown in the nation’s ninth largest city  with a police force of more than 3,000 officers that hot  spots policing (1) can be implemented using light footprint,  evidence-based  tactics  that  are  sustainable  over  several  years  within  existing  police  resources,  and  (2)  can substantially reduce violent crime in targeted micro  areas  (Smith,  2024)  while  lowering  the  number  of  violent incidents by a robust 14% across a city of more than  1.3 million people. These findings also suggest that many  cities in the U.S. would benefit from a similar strategy and  likely can implement it even when faced with shortages  of sworn officers. Indeed, it is because of a shortage of  officers and ongoing recruiting challenges in many cities  that hot spots policing is critical to police efforts to help  control violent crime. Police cannot be everywhere and  cannot arrest everyone who commits a jailable offense,  but they can smartly focus their limited resources on the  places and people most likely to generate violent crime  and  thereby  measurably  and  sustainably  reduce  overall  street violence in their communities.

9  After some successful experimentation with supplementing HV treatment  by having officers exit their lighted patrol vehicles to also patrol on foot in  their assigned grids, Dallas moved all high visibility treatment grids to high  visibility “plus” treatment by the second year of implementation of the Dallas hot spots strategy.

Finally, this study explores the effects of hot spots policing on city-wide violent crime in one metroplex in the  State of Texas. While limited in generalizability, it provides strong evidence that police departments can efficiently lower their jurisdictions’ crime by concentrating  resources in a very small number of micro places. Additionally, our choice in limiting the scope of this study to  one metropolitan area was driven by the need to account  for similar patterns in crime, as well as ensuring that the  cities  experienced  similar  criminogenic  environments  and seasonal patterns. We recognize the variation in the  counts of crime incidents per year in each city. However,  this study’s goal is to evaluate the patterns and trends of  crime across a seven-year period. Future research should  replicate this study in other jurisdictions.

Limitations

Our study is impacted by at least four potential limitations. First, DPD is a forward-thinking police department  that  relies  on  cutting  edge,  evidence-based  practices.  Therefore, it is important to acknowledge that the department is always looking to leverage new, innovative techniques to not only improve its operations but also reduce  all types of crime. These practices may introduce other  potential  explanations  for  fluctuations  in  crime  levels  across  the  city.  In  sum,  we  cannot  completely  rule  out  potential confounding factors related to crime reduction  in the city of Dallas. We addressed this limitation with  the use of interrupted time series analysis which enabled  us to isolate violent crime patterns, before, during, and  after  implementation  of  the  hot  spots  strategy.  Based  on  the  results,  we  are  confident  that  the  demonstrated  reductions in violent crime in hot spots played a pivotal  role in overall city-wide decreases in crime. 

Conclusion

Our study provides strong evidence that adoption of targeted policing strategies in violent crime hot spots can  potentially reduce overall city-wide violent crime counts.  The analysis revealed that Dallas experienced a larger, significant reduction in violent crime relative to two nearby  comparison  cities  in  its  metro  area.  Specifically,  Dallas  achieved a 14% reduction in two years of treatment when  compared  to  the  five  years  prior  to  treatment.  During  the same periods, there was a decrease in violent crime  of roughly 5% in Fort Worth, and Arlington experienced  an increase of about 18%. To ensure that Dallas’ crime  reduction was attributable to the hot spots strategy, we  compared  trends  across  the  city  with  trends  in  treated  grids and grids that never received treatment. The citywide violent crime reduction of 14% in Dallas was driven  by  the  cumulative  effects  of  the  hot  spots  intervention  which treated 313 unique grids over a two-year period.  While individual treatment cycles targeted 50–60 grids,  treatment was rotated every 60 days to ensure the city’s  highest  crime  locations  received  targeted  enforcement  during  the  appropriate  months.  The  56%  reduction  in  violent crime in treated grids, contrasted with the 21.5%  increase in non-treated grids, provides strong evidence of  a link between the hot spots intervention and the reductions seen citywide.

Second, we do not have full visibility on any potential  programs, interventions, or other contextual factors that  may have impacted violent crime rates in the comparison cities. While we are not aware of any ongoing formal  evaluations, interventions, or policy changes to address  violent  crime  within  the  comparison  cities,  we  were  unable to engage in extensive dialogue with stakeholders  within those cities. This limitation restricts our ability to  control for or accurately assess the impact of such measures on violent crime trends in control cities. That said,  the results of the interrupted time series analysis demonstrate that DPD’s hot spots treatments provided greater  crime control gains over and above any potential interventions in the control cities.

The  implications  of  these  findings  are  significant.  In  light  of  staffing  shortages  in  police  agencies  across  the  United States (Mourtgos et al., 2022), hot spots policing  provides  an  efficient,  cost-effective  strategy  to  reduce  violent crime when implemented carefully and with high  fidelity. By focusing limited resources on areas identified  as violent crime hot spots, law enforcement agencies can  maximize their impact on crime rates across their jurisdictions. This approach not only allows for the strategic  allocation of policing resources but also provides a scalable model that can be adapted to different jurisdictions  facing  varying  degrees  of  violent  crime  and  staffing  limitations.

Third,  a  portion  of  this  study  took  place  during  the  COVID-19 pandemic. As a result, violent crime patterns  may have been affected by local lockdowns and isolations  in each of the cities. To overcome this limitation, we used  two  control  cities  that  were  in  the  same  metropolitan  area. These cities would have been subjected to very similar  COVID-19  strains,  variants,  and  control  measures  taken by state and local governments.

While our findings are compelling, several important  questions  remain.  First,  the  degree  to  which  hot  spots  policing scales to different cities and crime environments  requires  further  exploration.  In  ongoing  research,  we  have replicated this study in Tacoma, WA; Salt Lake City,  UT, and San Antonio, TX. To date, preliminary findings  suggest comparable crime reduction effects in each of the  three cities that have implemented this hot spots intervention. The early evidence reinforces the broader applicability of this strategy. Future research should replicate  this study and continue to examine how contextual factors such as agency policies, crime trends, and local community responses influence the effectiveness of citywide  crime  reduction  strategies.  Additionally,  more  research  is needed to assess the long-term sustainability of crime  reductions attributed to hot spots policing and whether  complementary  strategies,  like  community-based  interventions, can further enhance the impact of deterrence  efforts.

Supplementary Information

The online version contains supplementary material available at  h t t p s : / / d o i . o r  g / 1 0 . 1 1 8 6 / s 4 0 1 6 3 - 0 2 5 - 0 0 2 4 7 - 9.

Supplementary Material 1

Author contribution

All authors read and approved the final manuscript.

Funding

This research was supported by the City of Dallas and Smart Policing grant  15PBJA-21-GG-04375-SMPT awarded by the Bureau of Justice Assistance,  United States Department of Justice. Any findings, conclusions, opinions, or  recommendations reflect those of the authors and not necessarily the City of  Dallas, Dallas Police Department, or BJA. 

Received: 8 October 2024 / Accepted: 26 February 2025

References

Andresen, M. A., & Malleson, N. (2011). Testing the stability of crime patterns: Implications for theory and policy. Journal of Research in Crime and Delinquency,  48(1), 58–82.

Andresen, M. A., Curman, A. S., & Linning, S. J. (2017). The trajectories of crime at  places. Journal of Quantitative Criminology, 33(3), 427–449.

Box, G. E. P., & Jenkins, G. M. (1976). Time series analysis: Forecasting and control.  (Revised ed.). Holden-Day.

Braga, A. A., Papachristos, A. V., & Hureau, D. M. (2010). The concentration and  stability of gun violence at micro places in Boston, 1980–2008. Journal of  Quantitative Criminology, 26(1), 33–53.

Braga, A. A., Papachristos, A. V., & Hureau, D. M. (2014). The effects of hot spots  policing on crime: An updated systematic review and meta-analysis. Justice  Quarterly, 31(4), 633–663.

Braga, A. A., Andresen, M. A., & Lawton, B. (2017). The law of crime concentration  at places: Editors’ introduction. Journal of Quantitative Criminology, 33(3),  421–426.

Braga, A. A., Turchan, B. S., Papachristos, A. V., & Hureau, D. M. (2019). Hot spots  policing and crime reduction: An update of an ongoing systematic review  and meta-analysis. Journal of Experimental Criminology, 15(3), 289–311.

Breusch, T. S. (1978). Some aspects of statistical inference in econometrics [Doctoral  dissertation, The Australian National University].

Campbell, D. T. (1986). Relabeling internal and external validity for applied social  scientists. New Directions for Program Evaluation, 1986(31), 67–77.

Cook, T. D., Campbell, D. T., & Shadish, W. (2002). Experimental and quasi-experimental designs for generalized causal inference (Vol. 1195). Houghton Mifflin.

Dallas County (2020, March 31). Amended order of County Judge Clay Jenkins:  Stay Home Stay Safe [Executive Order]. Dallas County.  h t t p s : / / w w w . d a l l a s c o u  n t y . o r g / c o v i d - 1 9 / c o u n t y - j u d g e / p a s t - o r d e r s / m a r c h - p a s t - o r d e r s . p h p

Dallas Police Department (2020). Violent crime reduction plan. Dallas Police Department.  h t t p s : / / d a l l a s p o l i c e . n e t / S h a r e d % 2 0 D o c u m e n t s / v i o l e n t - c r i m e - r e d u c t i  o n - p l a n . p d f

Dickey, D. A., & Fuller, W. A. (1979). Distribution of the estimators for autoregressive  time series with a unit root. Journal of the American Statistical Association,  74(366a), 427–431.

Eck, J. E., & Maguire, E. R. (2000). Have changes in policing reduced violent crime?  An assessment of the evidence. The Crime Drop in America, 207, 207–265.

Federal Bureau of Investigation. (2021). Crime in the United States, 2021. U.S. Department of Justice. https://cde.ucr.cjis.gov

Federal Bureau of Investigation. (2022). Crime in the United States, 2022. U.S. Department of Justice. https://cde.ucr.cjis.gov

Groff, E. R., Ratcliffe, J. H., Haberman, C. P., Sorg, E. T., Joyce, N. M., & Taylor, R. B.  (2015). Does what Police do at hot spots matter? The Philadelphia policing  tactics experiment. Criminology, 53(1), 23–53.

Hamilton, J. D. (2020). Time series analysis. Princeton University Press.

Hinkle, J. C., & Weisburd, D. (2008). The irony of broken windows policing: A microplace study of the relationship between disorder, focused Police crackdowns  and fear of crime. Journal of Criminal Justice, 36(6), 503–512.

Jenkins, S. (2020). Back to work: Dallas area leads country in employees returning  to the office. The Dallas Morning News.  h t t p s : / / w w w . d a l l a s n e w s . c o m / b u s i n e s s  / r e a l - e s t a t e / 2 0 2 0 / 0 9 / 0 7 / b a c k - t o - w o r k - d a l l a s - a r e a - l e a d s - c o u n t r y - i n - e m p l o y e  e s - r e t u r n i n g - t o - t h e - o ffi   c e /

Kochel, T. R. (2011). Constructing hot spots policing: Unexamined consequences  for disadvantaged populations and for Police legitimacy. Criminal Justice  Policy Review, 22(3), 350–374.

Koper, C. S. (1995). Just enough Police presence: Reducing crime and disorderly  behavior by optimizing patrol time in crime hot spots. Justice Quarterly, 12(4),  649–672.

Koper, C. S., Egge, S. J., & Lum, C. (2015). Institutionalizing place-based approaches:  Opening cases on gun crime hot spots. Policing, 9(3), 242–254.

Koper, C. S., Lum, C., Wu, X., & Hegarty, T. (2021). The long-term and system-level  impacts of institutionalizing hot spot policing in a small City. Policing, 15(2),  1110–1128.

Linden, A. (2015). Conducting interrupted time-series analysis for single-and  multiple-group comparisons. The Stata Journal, 15(2), 480–500.

Linden, A., & Adams, J. L. (2011). Applying a propensity score-based weighting  model to interrupted time series data: Improving causal inference in programme evaluation. Journal of Evaluation in Clinical Practice, 17(6), 1231–1238.

Lum, C., Koper, C. S., Wu, X., Johnson, W., & Stoltz, M. (2020). Examining the empirical realities of proactive policing through systematic observations and  computer-aided dispatch data. Police Quarterly, 23(3), 283–310.

Marklund, F., & Merenius, S. (2014). Policing crime hot spots: Results and experiences  from two projects against personal abuse and abuse. Bra.

Mazeika, D. M., & Kumar, S. (2017). Do crime hot spots exist in developing countries? Evidence from India. Journal of Quantitative Criminology, 33(1), 45–61.

Mourtgos, S. M., Adams, I. T., & Nix, J. (2022). Elevated Police turnover following the  summer of George Floyd protests: A synthetic control study. Criminology &  Public Policy, 21(1), 9–33.

National Research Council (2004). Fairness and effectiveness in policing: The  evidence. In Skogan, W., & Frydl, K. (Eds.). Committee on law and justice,  division of behavioral and social sciences and education (Committee to  Review Research on Police Policy and Practices). Washington, D. C. National  Academies.

National Institute of Justice (2013). Crime Solutions.  h t t p s : / / c r i m e s o l u t i o n s . o j p . g o v /  r a t e d p r a c t i c e s / 8 # p d

Nelson, A. L., Bromley, R. D. F., & Thomas, C. J. (2001). Identifying micro-spatial and  Temporal patterns of violent crime and disorder in the British City centre.  Applied Geography, 21(3), 249–274.

Newey, W. K., & West, K. D. (1987). Hypothesis testing with efficient method of  moments Estimation. International Economic Review, 777–787.

Ratcliffe, J. H., Groff, E. R., Sorg, E. T., & Haberman, C. P. (2015). Citizens’ reactions  to hot spots policing: Impacts on perceptions of crime, disorder, safety and  Police. Journal of Experimental Criminology, 11(3), 393–417.

Rosenfeld, R., Deckard, M. J., & Blackburn, E. (2014). The effects of directed patrol  and Self-Initiated enforcement on firearm violence: A randomized controlled  study of hot spot policing. Criminology, 52(3), 428–449.

Schnell, C., Braga, A. A., & Piza, E. L. (2017). The influence of community areas,  neighborhood clusters, and street segments on the Spatial variability of  violent crime in Chicago. Journal of Quantitative Criminology, 33(3), 469–496.

Sherman, L. W. (1995). Hot spots of crime and criminal careers of places. Crime and  Place, 4, 35–52.

Sherman, L. W., & Weisburd, D. (1995). General deterrent effects of Police patrol  in crime hot spots: A randomized, controlled trial. Justice Quarterly, 12(4),  625–648.

Sherman, L. W., Gartin, P. R., & Buerger, M. E. (1989). Hot spots of predatory crime:  Routine activities and the criminology of place. Criminology, 27(1), 27–56.

Sherman, L. W., Williams, S., Ariel, B., Strang, L. R., Wain, N., Slothower, M., & Norton,  A. (2014). An integrated theory of hot spots patrol strategy: Implementing  prevention by scaling up and feeding back. Journal of Contemporary Criminal  Justice, 30(2), 95–122.

Smith, M. R., Tillyer, R. Tregle, B. (2022) Dallas violent crime reduction plan: Year 1  evaluation. Dallas Police Department.  h t t p s : / / h c a p . u t s a . e d u / d o c u m e n t s / c r i m i  n a l - j u s t i c e / fi  n a l - u t s a - d p d - c r i m e - p l a n - y e a r - 1 - e v a l u a t i o n . p d f

Smith, M. R., Tillyer, R. Tregle, B., Cardwell, S. M., Fahmy, C. (2023) Dallas violent crime  reduction plan: Year 2 evaluation. Dallas Police Department.  h t t p s : / / h c a p . u t s a . e  d u / d o c u m e n t s / c r i m i n a l - j u s t i c e / fi  n a l - d p d - y 2 - r e p o r t - 8 . 2 2 . 2 3 . p d f

Smith, M. R., Tillyer, R., & Tregle, B. (2024). Hot spots policing as part of a city-wide  violent crime reduction strategy: Initial evidence from Dallas. Journal of  Criminal Justice, 90(2024): 102091.

Tate, S. (2020). Gov. Abbott to allow shelter-in-place to expire, businesses reopen  at 25% occupancy. KBTX.  h t t p s : / / w w w . k b t x . c o m / c o n t e n t / n e w s / G o v - A b b o t  t - t o - a l l o w - S h e l t e r - I n - P l a c e - t o - e x p i r e - b u s i n e s s e s - r e o p e n - a t - 2 5 - o c c u p a n c y - 5  6 9 9 8 6 1 5 1 . h t m l

Telep, C. W., Mitchell, R. J., & Weisburd, D. (2014). How much time should the Police  spend at crime hot spots? Answers from a Police agency directed randomized field trial in Sacramento, California. Justice Quarterly, 31(5), 905–933.

Tregle, B., Tillyer, R., & Smith, M. (2025). Hot spots policing: Assessing the impact on  Officer-Initiated activity. Police Quarterly, 10986111251317475.

U.S. Census Bureau. (2021). Population and housing unit estimates. U.S. Department  of Commerce.  h t t p s : / / w w w . c e n s u s . g o v / p r o g r a m s - s u r v e y s / p o p e s t . h t m l

Walter, R. J., Tillyer, M. S., & Acolin, A. (2023). Spatiotemporal crime patterns across  six US cities: Analyzing stability and change in clusters and outliers. Journal of  Quantitative Criminology, 39(4), 951–974.

Weisburd, D. (2015). The law of crime concentration and the criminology of place.  Criminology, 53(2), 133–157.

Weisburd, D., & Eck, J. E. (2004). What can Police do to reduce crime, disorder, and  fear? The Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science, 593(1),  42–65.

Weisburd, D., & Telep, C. W. (2014). Hot spots policing: What we know and what we  need to know. Journal of Contemporary Criminal Justice, 30(2), 200–220.

Weisburd, D., Bushway, S., Lum, C., & Yang, S. M. (2004). Trajectories of crime at  places: A longitudinal study of street segments in the City of Seattle. Criminology, 42(2), 283–322.

Weisburd, D., Wyckoff, L. A., Ready, J., Eck, J. E., Hinkle, J. C., & Gajewski, F. (2006).  Does crime just move around the corner? A controlled study of Spatial  displacement and diffusion of crime control benefits. Criminology, 44(3),  549–592.

Weisburd, D., Groff, E. R., & Yang, S. M. (2012). The criminology of place: Street segments and our Understanding of the crime problem. Oxford University Press.

Weisburd, D., Davis, M., & Gill, C. (2015). Increasing collective efficacy and social  capital at crime hot spots: New crime control tools for Police. Policing, 9(3),  265–274.

Weisburd, D., Braga, A. A., Groff, E. R., & Wooditch, A. (2017). Can hot spots policing  reduce crime in urban areas? An agent-based simulation. Criminology, 55(1),  137–173.

Weisburd, D., White, C., & Wooditch, A. (2020). Does collective efficacy matter at  the micro geographic level? Findings from a study of street segments. British  Journal of Criminology, 60(4), 873–891.

Wooldridge, J. M. (2010). Econometric analysis of cross section and panel data. MIT  Press.

Publisher’s note

Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in  published maps and institutional affiliations.

